Citation: Amit R, Glick B, Itzchak Y, et al. Acute severe combined demyelination. Childs Nerv Syst. 1992;8:354-356. PMID: 1394285
Source: PDF extraction

---


--- Page 1 ---
Child's Nerv Syst (1992) 8:354-356 
16NS 9 Springer-Verlag 1992 
Acute severe combined demyelination 
R. Amit 1, B. Glick 2, Y. Itzchak 3, Y. Dgani 2, and S. Meyeir 4 
1 Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 3705 Fifth Avenue at DeSoto, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
2 Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah University Hospital, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel 
3 Department of Radiology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 
Alyn Children's Orthopedic Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel 
Received June 7, 1991 
Abstract. We present a second case in which Guillain- 
Barr~ syndrome (GBS) and acute disseminated en- 
cephalomyelitis (ADEM) appeared simultaneously, both 
in acute and fulminant form. The patient, a 10-year-old 
girl, presented with acute onset of coma and flaccid, are- 
flexic quadriparesis. The elevated CSF protein levels and 
delayed F waves fulfilled the criteria of GBS and an MRI 
study revealed extensive multifocal demyelination com- 
patible with a diagnosis of ADEM. Prompt clinical re- 
sponse followed by complete recovery was achieved by 
treatment with corticosteroids. It is suggested that acute 
severe combined demyelination might constitute a sepa- 
rate entity in which the demyelinating process, involving 
simultaneously the central and the peripheral nervous 
systems, indicates immune response against a component 
of the myelin of one system carrying cross-antigenicity 
with the other. 
Key words: Guillain-Barr6 syndrome - Acute disseminat- 
ed encephalomyelopathy - Combined demyelination 
Central nervous system (CNS) involvement in Guillain- 
Barr6 syndrome (GBS) has been reported [3-5, 8, 9]. 
Usually the predominant clinical manifestations have 
been those of peripheral neuropathy associated with be- 
havioral changes, papilledema, extensor toe sign, and 
electroencephalographic abnormalities. Blenow et al. [4] 
introduced the term "encephalo-myelo-radiculo-neu- 
ropathy" to describe this combined involvement. In 1985 
Amit et al. [1] reported a case of acute severe combined 
involvement of both peripheral and central myelin. In 
this case, GBS was simultaneously combined with acute 
disseminated encephalomyelopathy (ADEM). We here 
present a second case of a combined central and peripher- 
al demyelinating process and discuss the possibility that 
this may constitute a separate pathogenic entity of acute 
severe combined demyelination (ASCD). 
Correspondence to: R. Amit Case report 
A 10-year-old girl, generally in good health, was admitted to a local 
hospital for observation of high temperature, headache, and ab- 
dominal and leg pain. A laparotomy performed because of acute 
abdomen was unrevealing. Recovery from anesthesia was followed 
by a comatose state that lasted 24 h and flaccid quadriparesis. Two 
weeks later the girl was transferred to another hospital where the 
following were recorded: intact mental status, flaccid quadriparesis 
and areflexia, and lack of sphincter control. Sensory level could not 
be determined. Examination of the spinal fluid revealed 20 lympho- 
cytes and 50 red blood cells per ml. The protein level was 88 mg/ 
100 ml. Computed tomography (CT) of the head was normal. Urea, 
glucose, electrolyte, and liver enzyme concentrations were all within 
normal limits. Testing of urine for porphyrine and heavy metals was 
negative. Blood cultures and serological tests for polio viruses were 
negative. Electrophysiological studies of peripheral nerves gave re- 
sults all within normal limits, except for an absence of F waves. 
Somatosensory evoked responses revealed low amplitude at the level 
of the lower brainstem. CT myelography was normal and the spinal 
repeat tap was acellular with a protein level of 100 mg/100 ml. 
With a presumptive diagnosis of a GBS the patient was trans- 
ferred to a pediatric rehabilitation hospital. A repeated electrophys- 
iological study of the peripheral nerves revealed normal conduction 
time and absence of F waves in the medial and tibial nerves of both 
sides. Eight weeks from onset, increased tonus, hyperreflexia, 
clonus, and upgoing toes were found bilaterally in the lower extrem- 
ities. Dysarthria and incomplete sphincter control were present. 
Autonomic phenomena such as fragmented flushing of different 
parts of the patient's body and paroxysmal sweating were observed. 
Nine weeks from onset, examination of the fundi revealed bilateral 
swelling of the optic disks, which was interpreted as optic neuritis. 
Ten weeks from onset, corneal and gag reflex were absent. The 
following electrophysiological studies were performed: visual 
evoked potential - no electrical activity could be traced, nerve con- 
duction velocity was normal, and F response appeared normal. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the brain revealed 
extensive multifocal demyelination (Fig. 1). 
At that time, 11 weeks from onset, the patient developed bilater- 
al bronchopneumonia. She was treated with broad-spectrum antibi- 
otics and methylprednisolone 300 rag/day. Within five days of onset 
of steroid therapy, substantial neurological improvement was ob- 
served. Gag and corneal reflexes returned and the hypertonus of the 
muscles decreased. Two months later, the patient had recovered 
completely and the neurological examination revealed only fine 
intention tremor in the left hand. Repeat MRI of the brain revealed 
a substantial improvement of the demyelination process (Fig. 2). 

--- Page 2 ---
355 
Fig. I a, b. Axial MR; T2-weighted 
images showing extensive multifocal 
demyelinating areas 
Fig. 2 a, b. Axial MR; T2-weighted 
images 2 months after start of cortico- 
steroid therapy 
Discussion 
The patient described here presented simultaneous in- 
volvement of both central and peripheral nervous sys- 
tems. Involvement of the CNS was initially manifested by 
the acute onset of coma and later by the pyramidal signs 
in the lower extremities. The MRI study supports the 
diagnosis of ADEM. The involvement of the peripheral 
nervous system (PNS) was manifested by the flaccid, are- 
flexic weakness lasting for several weeks. The protein-cel- 
lular dissociation in the CSF and the absent F waves on 
electromyelography support the diagnosis of GBS. In the 
presence of normal nerve conduction velocity it may be 
argued that myelitis cannot be ruled out. However, the 
long-lasting areflexic-hypotonic paralysis is highly indic- 
ative of peripheral nerve involvement that dominated the 
clinical picture. During the 11 weeks that elapsed between 
the onset of symptoms and the initiation of corticosteroid 
treatment, different stages were noted in the course of the 
clinical manifestations. It seems that the different stages 
resulted from the changes in the intensity and extent of 
involvement of each system (CNS and PNS). 
There are only a few disease entities in which substan- 
tial involvement of both CNS and PNS exist. Our discus- 
sion is limited to those entities of demyelinating origin. 
Combined myelinopathy is known to occur in dysmyelo- 
genesis of metabolic origin, such as metachromatic 
leukodystrophy and Krabbe disease. These are heredi- 
tary chronic disorders with a well-defined enzymatic de- 
fect. Association of chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyradiculopathy was reported in cases of multiple scle- 
rosis [7, 10]. It is not clear whether the simultaneous 
occurrence of combined central and peripheral demyeli- 
nation in these patients is a coincidence or whether the 
two disorders are pathologically related. Willis et al. [12] reported CNS involvement in children with recurrent 
polyneuropathy. The authors point out that in spite of 
CNS involvement there was no unequivocal evidence of 
central demyelination. To the best of our knowledge our 
two patients with ASCD are the only cases of CNS in- 
volvement in GBS with radiological evidence of central 
demyelination. 
Whether ASCD represent a clinical variant of enceph- 
alo-myelo-radiculo-neuropathy, as described by Blenow 
et al. [4], or is a separate pathogenic entity will require 
further investigation. The following specific characteriza- 
tions of our two cases support the latter: (a) The unusual 
clinical presentation of simultaneous acute and severe 
involvement of both PNS and CNS, (b) the radiological 
evidence of central demyelination, and (c) the prompt 
clinical response to corticosteroid therapy (the issue of 
corticosteroids in either GBS or ADEM is not clear and 
there are no convincing reports about their efficacy). 
The recognition of the possibility of overlapping 
symptomatology of the two systems is of major impor- 
tance for early diagnosis of ASCD, since flaccid quadri- 
paresis and hyporeflexia are commonly found in the ini- 
tial phases of acute encephalopathy. We therefore suggest 
that electrophysiological studies of the PNS (electromy- 
elography and NCV) be performed in cases where acute 
encephalopathic clinical signs are associated with hypo- 
tonia and hyporeflexia that do not resolve within 72 h. It 
is also worth noting in this regard that CT of the brain 
may not always be sufficient in confirming central de- 
myelinating processes in ADEM [2, 6]. In such cases, 
MRI of the brain may be more sensitive in disclosing the 
pathology and is therefore recommended. 
Pathogenetically, both GBS and ADEM appear to be 
postinfectious, immunologically mediated attacks on a 
component of the myelin. It is assumed that in cases with 

--- Page 3 ---
356 
combined involvement of both central and peripheral 
myelin, an immune response occurs against a component 
of the myelin shared by the two systems. Two such com- 
ponents of the PNS, P1, which is considered to be identi- 
cal to CNS myelin basic protein, and galactocerebroside 
[11], both possessing neuritogenic properties, could func- 
tion as target antigens in this syndrome. 
References 
1. Amit R, Shapira Y, Blank A, Aker M (1986) Acute, severe, 
central and peripheral nervous system combined demyelina- 
tion. Pediatr Neurol 2:47-50 
2. Atlas SW, Grossman RI, Goldberg HI, Hackney DB, Bilaniuk 
LT, Zimmerman RA (1986) MRI diagnosis of acute disseminat- 
ed encephalo-myelitis. J Comput Assist Tomogr 10: 798- 801 
3. Baker AB (1943) Guillain-Barr6's disease (encephalo-myelo- 
radiculitis): a review of 33 cases. J Lancet 63:384-398 
4. Blennow G, Gamstorp I, Rosenberg R (1968) Encephalo- 
myelo-radiculo-neuropathy. Dev M ed Child Neurol 10:485- 
490 5. Gamstorp I (1974) Encephalo-myelo-radiculo-neuropathy: in- 
volvement of the CNS in children with Guillain-Barr6-Strohl 
syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol 16:654-658 
6. Lukes SA, Norman D (1983) Computed tomography in acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis. Ann Neurol 13: 567-572 
7. Mendell JR, Kolkin S, Kissel JT, Weiss KL, Chakeres DW, 
Rammohan KW (1987) Evidence for central nervous system 
demyelination in chronic inflammatory demyelinating poly- 
radiculoneuropathy. Neurology 37:1291-1294 
8. Morley JB, Reynolds EH (1966) Papilledema and Landry-Guil- 
lain-Barr6 syndrome. Case report and review. Brain 89:205 
9. Rossi LN (1977) L'enc6phalomyelo-radiculoneuropathy: la 
participation du systbme nerveux centrale dans la polyradiculite 
aigfie de l'enfant. Arch Fr Pediatr 134:399-405 
10. Rubin M, Karpati G, Carpenter S (1987) Combined central and 
peripheral myelinopathy. Neurology 37:1287-1290 
1i. Whitaker JN (1981) The protein antigen of peripheral nerve 
myelin. Ann Neurol 9 [Suppl]: 56-64 
12. Willis J, Van Den Berg P (1988) Cerebral involvement in chil- 
dren with acute relapsing polyneuropathy. J Child Neurol 
3:200-204 
