Citation: Bernard G, Riou E, Rosenblatt B, et al. Simultaneous Guillain-Barre syndrome and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis in the pediatric population. J Child Neurol. 2008;23(7):752-757. PMID: 18354151
Source: PDF extraction

---


--- Page 1 ---
752nervous system and the central nervous system. A medical
record review of these 4 patients was undertaken to betterdefine this potential entity.
Results
A summary of the clinical presentation, investigations,treatment, and prognosis for each of the 4 patients isgiven in Table 1. Each case is presented in detail herein.
Case 1
Our first case was a 10-year-old boy, previously healthy,
who presented to our institution with an altered level of 
consciousness, a T5 sensory level, diffuse weakness (lowerextremities were more affected), hyperreflexia, bilateralBabinski signs, and urinary and fecal retention. The patienthad experienced an upper respiratory tract infection 3 weeksbefore presentation and viral gastroenteritis 3 days beforeadmission. Magnetic resonance imaging of the spine andbrain showed multiple signal abnormalities in the white mat-ter, consistent with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.Lumbar puncture revealed mild pleocytosis (leucocyte countof 60/ μL, with 45% neutrophils, 20% lymphocytes, and 35%
monocytes) and a high protein level (0.70 g/L). The patientGuillain-Barré syndrome, or acute demyelinatingpolyradiculoneuropathy, and acute disseminatedencephalomyelitis are 2 common and well-defined
diseases of the pediatric population. Both are hypothesizedto be related to a viral-induced autoimmune response. Theoccurrence of these 2 entities, simultaneously or sequen-tially during a short period, is not well understood and isprobably underdiagnosed. We review the hallmarks of 4pediatric cases of simultaneous or sequential Guillain-Barrésyndrome and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis duringa short period.
Methods
Between 2003 and 2006, 4 patients presented to ourinstitution with combined demyelination of the peripheralOriginal Article
Simultaneous Guillain-Barré Syndrome and 
Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in the Pediatric Population
Geneviève Bernard, MD, MSc, Émilie Riou, MD, Bernard Rosenblatt, MD, FRCPC, 
Marie-Emmanuelle Dilenge, MD, FRCPC, and Chantal Poulin, MD, FRCPC
Few cases of simultaneous acute demyelination of the periph-
eral and central nervous systems are reported. Four patientsdiagnosed as having Guillain-Barré syndrome and acute dis-seminated encephalomyelitis during the same hospitalizationare described herein. Two patients manifest an atypical form ofGuillain-Barré syndrome, with magnetic resonance imaging ofthe head showing acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. A third patient has acute disseminated encephalomyelitis 
and develops Guillain-Barré syndrome during his hospitaliza-tion. A fourth patient demonstrates transverse myelitis thatevolves into Guillain-Barré syndrome, with demyelination seenon brain magnetic resonance imaging. All patients are treatedwith intravenous immunoglobulins or corticosteroids. Three
patients have a favorable outcome; 1 patient has a chronicinflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. Guillain-Barré syndrome and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis canoccur simultaneously in the pediatric population. This may beexplained by a shared epitope between peripheral and centralnervous system myelin. Further research is necessary to betterdescribe this entity and its prognosis.
Keywords: demyelination; Guillain-Barré syndrome; inflamma-
tory demyelinat ing polyradiculoneuropathy; acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis
From the Division of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Children’s
Hospital, McGill University, Quebec, Canada.
Address correspondence to: Geneviève Bernard, MD, MSc, Montreal
Children’s Hospital, McGill University, 2300 Tupper, Montreal, QCH3H 1P3, Canada; phone: (514) 412-4400 (# 24466); e-mail:genevievebernard@hotmail.com.
Bernard G, Riou É, Rosenblatt B, Dilenge M-E, Poulin C. Simultaneous
guillain-barré syndrome and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis inthe pediatric population. J Child Neurol . 2008;23:752-757.Journal of Child Neurology
Volume 23 Number 7
July 2008  752-757
© 2008 Sage Publications
10.1177/0883073808314360
http://jcn.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
--- Page 2 ---
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis / Bernard et al 753
was treated with methylprednisolone (1 g/d for 5 days), with
mild improvement. During his hospitalization, he developedincreasing weakness and hyporeflexia. Nerve conductionstudies revealed prolonged motor and sensory latencies,slowed motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities, andprolonged or absent F waves. Needle examination revealed a small amount of fibrillation potentials, motor unitaction potentials of increased amplitudes and duration, and
mildly decreased recruitment. These results were compatiblewith the diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome. A 3-dosecourse of intravenous immunoglobulins was administered,which resulted in significant improvement of his weakness.Serologic examination for Mycoplasma was positive, but the
cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain reaction was negative.The remaining serologic studies and cultures were negative.He was discharged from the hospital 39 days after his admis-sion, ambulating with help and able to transfer but stillrequiring intermittent catheterization. Six months after pres-entation, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spineshowed complete resolution of the signal abnormalities, andneurologic follow-up showed no residual deficits (except forbilateral Babinski reflexes).
In summary, case 1 presented with typical acute 
dissem inated encephalomyelitis and during his hospitaliza-
tion developed Guillain-Barré syndrome. He was treatedsequentially with intravenous methylprednisone and intra-
venous immunoglobulins, with significant improvement.
Case 2
Our second patient was a 5-year-old Native American girl.
She presented to our institution with diffuse progressiveweakness (predominantly proximal), areflexia, and dyses-thesias 1 week after a viral illness. Lumbar puncture wasperformed early in the course and revealed a normal pro-tein level. Serologic findings were compatible with acuteEpstein-Barr virus infection. Magnetic resonance imaging ofthe spine showed enhancement of the ventral and dorsalroots and of the cauda equina, which was compatiblewith Guillain-Barré syndrome. Nerve conduction studiesand electromyography were performed, with normal find-ings. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was per-formed because of the atypical presentation (proximalmore than distal weakness and normal electrophysiologicfindings) and showed several small areas of abnormal sig-nal in the white matter, compatible with a diagnosis ofacute disseminated encephalomyelitis. She was treatedwith intravenous methylprednisolone for 5 days, followedby a 2-week prednisone taper. Intravenous immunoglobu-lins were not given because of preserved ambulation. SheTable 1. Summary of Cases
Variable Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4
Age, y 10 5 11 16
Prior infectious illness Upper respiratory Epstein-Barr virus Upper respiratory Gastroenteritis
tract infection, tract infectiongastroenteritis, Mycoplasma
Primary diagnosis Acute disseminated Acute disseminated Guillain-Barré Transverse myelitis, 
encephalomyelitis encephalomyelitis syndrome Guillain-Barré 
syndrome
Secondary diagnosis Guillain-Barré Guillain-Barré Acute disseminated Acute disseminated 
syndrome syndrome (mild), encephalomyelitis encephalomyelitis (?)
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
Electromyography Acute demyelinating Chronic changes, Acute demyelinating Conduction block,
and nerve polyradiculoneuropathy proximal root and axonal absent F wavesconduction study demyelination polyradiculoneuropathyfindings
Treatment Methylprednisone, Methylprednisone Intravenous Intravenous 
intravenous immunoglobulins, immunoglobulinsimmunoglobulins gabapentin
Expanded Disability 
Status Scale score
a
Worst 7-9 5-6.5 7-9 5-6.5At discharge 5-6.5 0-2.5 3-4.5 3-4.5At last follow-up 0-2.5 0-2.5 0-2.5 0-2.5
Overall prognosis Very good Very good Very good Good
a. Score of 0 to 2.5 indicates normal neurologic examination results or mild abnormal signs without disability; 3 to 4.5, abnor mal signs plus some degree of disability
but fully ambulatory without aid; 5 to 6.5, severely disabled with unilateral or bilateral assisted walking; 7-9, unable to wal k and restricted to wheelchair or bed; and 10,
death due to demyelinating disease.
--- Page 3 ---
754 Journal of Child Neurology / Vol. 23, No. 7, July 2008
improved significantly and retained only mild proximal
weakness. During the next year, she presented twice withproximal more than distal limb weakness and hypore-flexia. Results of nerve conduction studies performed onthese 2 occasions suggested proximal root demyelination,and needle examination revealed positive sharp waves,fibrillation potentials, and polyphasic motor unit actionpotentials of larger amplitude and prolonged duration.Together with the clinical presentation, these results sug-gested chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradicu-loneuropathy. The patient was started on intravenousimmunoglobulins and responded well.
In summary, case 2 initially presented with a clinical diag-
nosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome associated with mild acutedisseminated encephalomyelitis, as evidenced by magneticresonance imaging of the spinal cord and brain. Althoughshe initially improved significantly with intravenous methyl-prednisolone, she eventually went on to develop chronicinflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy thatresponded well to intravenous immunoglobulins.
Case 3
Our third patient was an 11-year-old boy of white race/
ethnicity, previously healthy, who presented with progressivelower limb weakness, right facial paresis (lower motor neu-ron type), and decreased deep tendon reflexes following anupper respiratory tract infection. During a few hours, hedeveloped quadriparesis, facial diplegia (lower motor neurontype), sensory disturbances, autonomic instability, increased
secretions, and dysphagia. He was transferred to the inten-sive care unit and was intubated for airway protection. Heremained intubated for 4 days. Lumbar puncture was per-formed and revealed a high protein level (2.9 g/L). Nerveconduction studies showed increased motor latencies,decreased motor amplitudes, no sensory potential in theupper extremities, and absent F wave in the lower extremi-ties. Concentric needle examination revealed mildly reducedrecruitment, with slightly larger motor unit action potentials.These results confirmed the diagnosis of acute demyelinat-ing and axonal polyradiculoneuropathy. Magnetic resonanceimaging of the spinal cord revealed enhancement of the ven-tral and dorsal roots and of the cauda equina, compatiblewith a diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome. Significantimprovement was noted with intravenous immunoglobulintherapy. Gabapentin was started for neuropathic pain. Inview of the findings of mild psychomotor slowing (confirmedby neuropsychologic assessment) and preserved stretchreflexes, despite severe weakness, a decision was made toperform brain magnetic resonance imaging. This revealedseveral small areas of abnormal signal affecting the subcorti-cal white matter of both hemispheres, consistent with thediagnosis of acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis (Figure).Because of the mild central nervous system symptoms, adecision was made to observe the patient only, and no corti-costeroids were given. The patient improved during his hos-pitalization and was discharged 15 days later with mild facialdiplegia, mild difficulty with toe walking, positive Gower
Figure 1. T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance images from case 3. (A) Brain showing several subcortical and white matter round demyelina ting
lesions. (B), Spine after gadolinium administration showing enhancement of the roots and cauda equina.
--- Page 4 ---
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis / Bernard et al 755
sign, and some instability with the Romberg maneuver.
Otherwise, he was walking and transferring independently,climbing stairs with help, and hopping on 1 foot bilaterally.Two months later, the patient had recovered almost com-pletely except for mild right facial plegia and minimal weak-ness of the deltoids. Neuropathic pain resolved, andgabapentin was stopped. Magnetic resonance imaging of thespine and brain showed complete resolution of the radicularenhancement and the brain white matter abnormalities.
In summary, case 3 presented with rapidly progressive
Guillain-Barré syndrome with mildly symptomatic acutedisseminated encephalomyelitis. He had almost completerecovery with intravenous immunoglobulins.
Case 4
Our fourth patient was a 16-year-old boy of white race/
ethnicity, previously healthy, who presented after a prodromeof gastroenteritis with bilateral leg weakness and pain, uri-nary and fecal retention, and a T8 to T10 sensory level. Adiagnosis of transverse myelitis was made on the basis of theclinical picture. Magnetic resonance images of the head andspine were normal. Lumbar puncture was notable only for ahigh protein level (0.85 g/L). Significant improvement of alldeficits occurred during the following days. As he was recov-ering, he suddenly developed facial diplegia. Within the next24 hours, he developed sensory deficits over the mandibularbranch of the fifth cranial nerve bilaterally, left partial thirdnerve palsy, and left fourth nerve palsy. Later on, he devel-oped dysesthesias in the tips of his fingers, hyporeflexia,worsening weakness, and mild autonomic instability. Nerveconduction studies revealed conduction block at the knee forthe left peroneal nerve and absent left peroneal F wave.Needle examination showed slightly reduced recruitmentand mild increased amplitude of the motor unit actionpotentials with some polyphasic units. Together with theclinical presentation, these results confirmed the diagnosisof Guillain-Barré syndrome. Magnetic resonance imaging ofthe spine showed diffuse radicular enhancement. A secondlumbar puncture showed a dramatic increase in the proteinlevel (5.1 g/L). The patient improved significantly withadministration of intravenous immunoglobulins. During hishospitalization, he developed bilateral papilledema. However,repeat magnetic resonance imaging of the brain with opticnerve windows failed to reveal enhancement of the opticnerves. Because the 2 lumbar punctures had shown nor-mal opening pressure and because sequential ophthal-mologic examination had revealed normal visual acuityand normal Goldmann visual fields, optic nerve edemawas attributed to the high concentration of proteins inthe cerebrospinal fluid. Before discharge, third mag-netic resonance imaging of the head was performed andrevealed 2 small white matter lesions, interpreted by thetreating neurologic team as representing mild asympto-matic acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis.In summary, case 4 presented with a typical clinical pic-
ture of postviral transverse myelitis and went on to developsuperimposed Guillain-Barré syndrome and papilledemasecondary to increased proteinorrachia. Imaging wasremarkable for 2 asymptomatic white matter lesions sugges-tive of acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis. He recoveredwell with intravenous immunoglobulins.
Discussion
Central nervous system demyelination in conjunction withchronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropa-thy has been reported numerous times in the adult popula-tion.
1-19Neuroimaging in affected patients has revealed
cerebral demyelinating lesions in up to 23% of the patientsstudied.
8-12,17Stojkovic et al8evaluated visual-evoked poten-
tials in patients diagnosed as having chronic inflammatorydemyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy and found abnormalpotentials in 8 of 17 patients; 3 of these 8 patients hadabnormal magnetic resonance imaging of the brain.
For the pediatric population, a review of the literature
reveals 5 pediatric cases of concomitant chronic inflam-matory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy and mul-tiple sclerosis.
14,20,21Pirko et al20described 3 patients
with childhood-onset multiple sclerosis who developedchronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropa-
thy several months after starting interferon therapy. Mariotti et al
21and Watanabe et al14described patients who initially
manifested central nervous system demyelinating symptoms,
were treated with prednisone or intravenous immunoglob-ulins, and subsequently developed immunoglobulin-dependent chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradicu-loneuropathy in the absence of interferon therapy. Case 2
herein displays some similarities with these 3 patients (eg,chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathyassociated with central nervous system demyelination), andthe pathogenesis of their mixed disease may be similar.
There is scant literature on concomitant acute dissemi-
nated encephalomyelitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome inadult and pediatric populations. Okumura et al,
22Amit 
et al,23,24and Itokazu et al25described patients with an infec-
tious prodrome who developed central nervous system symp-toms (coma, lethargy, and weakness) and were soon found to have absent or decreased reflexes and tetraparesis. Inall of these cases, results of imaging, nerve conduction stud-ies, and electromyography were consistent with combineddemyelination of the central and peripheral nervous systems.Cerebrospinal fluid studies showed increased protein levelsand negative oligoclonal banding. Therapy with corticos-teroids or intravenous immunoglobulins induced recovery,with good outcome in all patients. These patients are similarto cases 1, 3, and 4 herein in terms of their presentation,response to therapy, and outcome, suggesting a commonpathogenesis.
--- Page 5 ---
756 Journal of Child Neurology / Vol. 23, No. 7, July 2008
The occurrence of simultaneous demyelinating involve-
ment of the peripheral and central nervous systems is poorlydefined. It seems logical to assume an immunologic origin ofthese different diseases, and it has been suggested that animmune response to a common epitope component of bothperipheral and central nervous system myelin could beresponsible.
22,23However, this does not explain the wide
spectrum of combined involvement that is seen and its rela-tive paucity among patients with demyelinating diseases.Further studies should better define these entities and mayhelp explain the spectrum of severity and outcome seen withthese diseases.
We believe that the disease in cases 1, 3, and 4 herein
represents a distinct subgroup of demyelinating disease,predominantly seen in the pediatric population, manifestingas simultaneous demyelination of the peripheral and centralnervous systems following an infectious insult. As previouslynoted among patients by Amit et al,
23Okumura et al,22and
Itokazu et al,25the patients herein responded well to corti-
costeroids (central nervous system demyelination) or intra-venous immunoglobulins (peripheral demyelination) andhad favorable outcomes, without recurrence.
Case 2 could be classified among pediatric and adult
patients who present with evidence of a chronic central nerv-ous system demyelinating disease with relapses (multiplesclerosis) and who subsequently develop chronic demyelina-tion of the peripheral nervous system (chronic inflammatorydemyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy) with or withoutinterferon therapy. Outcome in this instance seems to bemuch more guarded, and requirement of long-term immunetherapy is the rule for most patients. Our patient differsslightly from this pattern because she presented with mildcentral nervous system demyelinating disease and mildperipheral nervous system involvement, which evolved intochronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropa-thy without evidence of multiple sclerosis.
This classification is tentative as much is unknown about
combined demyelinating diseases. For instance, one canhypothesize that systematic imaging in patients withGuillain-Barré syndrome or chronic inflammatory demyeli-nating polyradiculoneuropathy, as well as systematic neuro-physiologic studies in patients with acute disseminatedencephalomyelitis or transverse myelitis, would yield notableresults. It may be that several demyelinating lesions go unno-ticed, obscured by the clinical picture of the main disorder(eg, an altered level of consciousness in patients with acutedisseminated encephalomyelitis can easily obscure a patternof peripheral weakness or sensory symptoms).
Increasing knowledge of these pathologic conditions
may trigger discovery of previously unrecognized patientsand help better define the entities of Guillain-Barré syn-drome, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradicu-loneuropathy, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, andmultiple sclerosis in children. We believe that a multi-center prospective study of demyelinating disorders inchildren with strict criteria and systematic neurophysio-
logic and imaging studies would increase our understandingof the spectrum of the diseases and could lead to refinementof therapy (eg, corticosteroids vs immunoglobulins or plasmaexchange in the acute setting, as well as the role of interferontherapy, in this pathologic condition).
Acknowledgments
This work was performed at Montreal Children’s Hospital.This study was presented as an abstract at the 10th Interna-tional Child Neurology Congress; June 11-16, 2006; Montreal,Quebec, Canada.
References
1. Kinoshita A, Kaseda S, Yagi K, Oda M, Tanabe H. A case of acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis with pathologically proven acutedemyelinating lesion in the peripheral nervous system [inJapanese]. Rinsho Shinkeigaku . 1994;34(9):892-897.
2. Katchanov J, Lünemann JD, Masuhr F, et al. Acute combined
central and peripheral inflammatory demyelination. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry . 2004;75(12):1784-1786.
3. Aimoto Y, Moriwaka F, Matsumoto A, et al. A case of acute dis-
seminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) associated with demyeli-nating peripheral neuropathy [in Japanese]. No To Shinkei .
1996;48(9):857-860.
4. Toshniwal P. Demyelinating optic neuropathy with Miller-
Fischer syndrome: the case for overlap syndromes with centraland peripheral demyelination. J Neurol . 1987;234(5):353-358.
5. Capello E, Roccatagliata L, Schenone A, et al. Acute axonal form
of Guillain-Barré syndrome in a multiple sclerosis patient: chanceassociation or linked disorders? Eur J Neurol . 2000;7(2):223-225.
6. Sekiguchi K, Susuki K, Funakawa I, Jinnai K, Yuki N. Cerebral
white matter lesions in acute motor axonal neuropathy. Neurology .
2003;61(2):272-273.
7. Aimoto Y, Ito K, Moriwaka F, Tashiro K, Abe K. Demyelinating
peripheral neuropathy in Devic disease. Jpn J Psychiatry Neurol .
1991;45(4):861-864.
8. Stojkovic T, de Seze J, Hurtevent JF, et al. Visual evoked poten-
tials study in chronic idiopathic inflammatory demyelinatingpolyneuropathy. Clin Neurophysiol . 2000;111(12):2285-2291.
9. Ormerod IE, Waddy HM, Kermode AG, Murray NM, Thomas
PK. Involvement of the central nervous system in chronicinflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: a clinical, electro-physiological and magnetic resonance imaging study. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry . 1990;53(9):789-793.
10. Mendell JR, Kolkin S, Kissel JT, Weiss KL, Chakeres DW,
Rammohan KW. Evidence for central nervous system demyeli-nation in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneu-ropathy. Neurology . 1987;37(8):1291-1294.
11. Uncini A, Gallucci M, Lugaresi A, Porrini AM, Onofrj M,
Gambi D. CNS involvement in chronic inflammatory demyeli-nating polyneuropathy: an electrophysiological and MRI study.Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol . 1991;31(6):365-371.
12. Feasby TE, Hahn AF, Koopman WJ, Lee DH. Central lesions in
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. Neurology .
1990;40(3, pt 1):476-478.
--- Page 6 ---
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis / Bernard et al 757
13. Matsuse D, Ochi H, Tahisro K, et al. Exacerbation of chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy duringinterferon β-1b therapy in a patient with childhood-onset multi-
ple sclerosis. Intern Med . 2005;44(1):68-72.
14. Watanabe Y, Ishikawa Y, Wakai S, et al. A case of multiple sclerosis
associated with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradicu-loneuropathy [in Japanese]. No To Hattatsu . 1993;25(1):70-75.
15. Thomas PK, Walker RW, Rudge P, et al. Chronic demyelinating
peripheral neuropathy associated with multifocal central nerv-ous system demyelination. Brain . 1987;110(pt 1):53-76.
16. Rubin M, Karpati G, Carpenter S. Combined central and
peripheral myelinopathy. Neurology . 1987;37(8):1287-1290.
17. Hagen K, Mellgren SI, Bovim G. Myelin diseases affecting both
the central and the peripheral nervous system [in Norwegian].Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen . 1998;118(23):3600-3602.
18. Hamaguchi K. Guillain-Barré syndrome and acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM). Rinsho Shinkeigaku . 1996;36(12):
1301-1307.
19. Laura M, Leong W, Murray NMF, et al. Chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: MRI study of brain andspinal cord. Neurology . 2005;64(5):914-916.20. Pirko I, Kuntz NL, Patterson M, Keegan BM, Weinshenker BG,
Rodriguez M. Contrasting effects of IFN βand IVIG in children
with central and peripheral demyelination. Neurology . 2003;
60(10):1697-1699.
21. Mariotti P, Batocchi AP, Colosimo C, et al. Multiphasic
demyelinating disease involving central and peripheral nervoussystem in a child. Neurology . 2003;60(2):348-349.
22. Okumura A, Ushida H, Maruyama K, et al. Guillain-Barré syn-
drome associated with central nervous system lesions. Arch Dis
Child . 2002;86(4):304-306.
23. Amit R, Glick B, Itzchak Y, et al. Acute severe combined
demyelination. Childs Nerv Syst . 1992;8(6):354-356.
24. Amit R, Shapira Y, Blank A, Aker M. Acute, severe, central and
peripheral nervous system combined demyelination. Pediatr
Neurol . 1986;2(1):47-50.
25. Itokazu N, Kodama Y, Kontani S, Inoue S, Sugimoto T, Ohi T. 
A case of acute polyradiculoneuritis with multiple cranial nervepalsy and cerebral lesion: possible evidence of encephalo- myelo-
radiculo-neuropathy [in Japanese]. No To Hattatsu . 1998;30(5):
423-429.