CASE REPORT/CASE SERIES

A Case Report of Overlapping Miller Fisher Syndrome,
Guillain-Barré Syndrome, and the Bickerstaff Brainstem
Encephalitis
Choong Sik Chae, MD, Kyoung Min Kwon, MD, Jung Soo Lee, MD, PhD,
and Yeo Hyung Kim, MD

Introduction: Patients with overlapping Miller Fisher syndrome
(MFS), Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), and the Bickerstaff brainstem
encephalitis (BBE) have rarely been reported, and the diverse clinical
features and sequelae are challenging for physicians. Through this case
report, we present the clinical course, treatment, recovery, and sequelae
of an overlapping MFS, GBS, and BBE syndrome and provide a review
of the literature.
Case Report: A 76-year-old woman was initially presented with diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia, but she later developed weakness of
limbs, respiratory failure, deterioration of consciousness, and cognitive
impairment. After IV immunoglobulin and corticosteroid therapy, she
began to recover consciousness and from the weakness from day 18.
After 8 months of rehabilitative therapy, she was able to swallow food
without difﬁculty, but she still cannot walk without assistance, showed
cognitive impairment, and the tracheostomy remained in place because
of persistent respiratory muscle weakness.
Conclusions: As the clinical course of MFS-GBS-BBE overlapping
syndrome is variable, involving not only the peripheral but also the
central nervous system, the establishment of a comprehensive therapeutic strategy is warranted.
Key Words: Miller Fisher syndrome, Guillain-Barré syndrome, central
nervous system, brainstem, encephalitis

(The Neurologist 2018;23:128–130)

T

here are several clinical subtypes of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and its variants Miller Fisher syndrome
(MFS) and the Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis (BBE) with
different neurological features and presentations.1,2 Although
the typical clinical features of GBS, MFS, and BBE are wellrecognized, GBS is also used as a broad term to describe a
number of related acute autoimmune neuropathies and it
sometimes cannot comprehensively describe the full spectrum
of related diseases including overlapping cases.1,3 The evidence
from overlapping cases supports the classiﬁcation of MFS,
GBS, and BBE as subtypes within a clinical spectrum of the

From the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
The English in this document has been checked by at least 2 professional
editors, both native speakers of English (for a certiﬁcate, please see:
www.textcheck.com/certiﬁcate/llBlil).
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Reprints: Yeo Hyung Kim, MD, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine,
Uijeongbu St. Mary’s Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea 271, Cheonbo-Ro, Uijeongbu-si, Gyeonggi-do
11765, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kyhyung@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
ISSN: 1074-7931/18/2304-0128
DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000183

same disease, possibly affecting the peripheral and/or central
nervous systems.1,3,4
Patients with overlapping MFS, GBS, and BBE have
rarely been reported, and the clinical course and prognosis of
the disease have not been described in detail. Herein, we report
a Korean female with a GBS overlapping syndrome showing
the manifestations of peripheral and central nervous system
involvement. The clinical diagnosis of GBS was supported by
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) albuminocytological dissociation,
serologic anti-GQ1b antibodies, and an electrophysiological
evidence of acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy. This
case report illustrates the challenging presentation, treatment,
recovery, and sequelae of an overlapping MFS-GBS-BBE
syndrome and provides a review of the literature.

CASE REPORT
A 76-year-old Asian woman developed myalgia, fever, nausea,
and vomiting for 3 days. She had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and hypertension 10 years before. She visited the emergency
room due to a gradual aggravation of her symptoms and the development of diplopia and ophthalmoplegia (day 1). At the emergency room,
her mental status was alert without limb weakness. She had gait disturbance with an ataxic pattern. Her deep tendon reﬂex was hypoactive,
and no pathologic reﬂex was observed. She was admitted to the neurological department with a diagnosis of MFS. Her CSF on day 1
showed increased protein levels (94.8 mg/dL) and 5 white blood cells/
mm3. On day 2, she could not open her eyes spontaneously due to
severe ptosis. A brain magnetic resonance imaging on day 3 showed no
remarkable ﬁndings. Dysarthria and dysphagia were newly developed,
and a Levin tube was inserted. She showed muscle weakness of
Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4 in the upper and lower
extremities. On day 3, her muscle power was aggravated to MRC grade
3 in all extremities. Dyspnea developed on day 4 and her oxygen saturation dropped to 82%. As her saturation level was not maintained, she
was intubated and assisted ventilation was started. The arterial CO2
levels remained constant within the normal range. On day 5, her limb
weakness further progressed to MRC grade 1. Her mental status
decreased from alert to a stupor state, and she showed a sluggish pupil
reﬂex. She was positive for immunoglobulin (Ig) G against GQ1b
(1:1600), but negative for IgGs against GM1, GD1b, GT1a, or GT1b
(normal range for each antibody <1:40) in a serum sample obtained on
day 2. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies revealed acute
motor and sensory axonal neuropathy and bilateral facial neuropathy.
A clinical diagnosis of GBS was considered and she received IV
immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy on day 6 for 5 days (400 mg/kg/d).
However, IVIG administration had no immediate effect on her motor
weakness and deteriorated mental status. A follow-up brain magnetic
resonance imaging on day 13 revealed no abnormalities in the brainstem
and cerebral hemispheres. A follow-up CSF examination on day 16
showed more increased protein levels (401.9 mg/dL) and 0 white blood
cells. Electroencephalography on day 17 showed diffuse cerebral dysfunction without epileptiform discharges. As her limb weakness and
stupor mental status were persistent after IVIG treatment, on day 17, the
patient received additional therapy with 1000 mg/d methylprednisolone

128 | www.theneurologist.org
The Neurologist  Volume 23, Number 4, July 2018
Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

The Neurologist  Volume 23, Number 4, July 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Stand with assistance
for a short time
after 6 mo
Diabetes
HTN
76/F
Our case
2018

Diplopia, ophthalmoplegia,
ataxia

Negative
56/M
Pegg et al9

Hands tingling, unsteadiness,
diplopia

Asthma
Unsteady gait
20/M
Han et al8

Not reported
72/F
Fujii et al7

Not reported

Facial numbness, diplopia,
vertigo, extremity tingling
sense, and weakness
Diplopia, unsteady gait
43/F
Stevenson
et al6

AMSAN indicates acute motor sensory axonal neuropathy; HTN, hypertension; IVIG, IV immunoglobulin; NCS, nerve conduction study; PE, plasma exchange.

IVIG (1 session)
IV Methylprednisolone
GQ1b (day 2)
AMSAN
Yes (day 1)

Walk with a frame
after 4-5 mo
IVIG (2 sessions)
PE
GD1a, GQ1b
(not reported)
AMSAN

AMSAN
No (day 1)
Yes (day 21)

No (day 1)
Yes (day 7)

Walk around with
support on day 132
IV Dexamethasone

Full recover after
10 mo
IVIG (2 sessions)
Immunoadsorption

GM1, GD1a,
GQ1b, GT1a
(day 6)
Negative
AMSAN
No (day 1)

Independent gait on
day 27
IVIG (1 session)
GM1
(not reported)
Demyelinating
Yes
(not reported)

Tandem gait on
day 22

Outcome
Treatment

PE (7 sessions)
GQ1b (day 2)
Not reported
Not reported

BBE day 1
MFS day 2
GBS day 5
BBE day 1
GBS day 9
MFS day 10
MFS day 1
GBS day 3
BBE day 5
MFS day 1
BBE day 12
GBS day 21
MFS day 1
GBS day 7
BBE day 42
MFS day 1
GBS day 3
BBE day 5
Not reported
Diplopia, unsteady gait
34/F
Arai et al5

Antibodies
(Sampling Day)
NCS
Albuminocytological
dissociation (day)
Clinical
Course
Comorbidity
Initial
Symptoms
Age/Sex

DISCUSSION
This case demonstrates the variable and unpredictable course
of overlapping MFS, GBS, and BBE. To our knowledge, 6 cases
of overlapping MFS-GBS-BBE, including the current patient, have
been reported since 2002 (age, 20 to 76 y; M:F, 2:4), as shown in
Table 1.5–9 An unsteady gait and oculomotor dysfunction are
commonly observed as the initial presentation. The overlap of the
second entity occurred within 2 weeks in all reported cases, and
the overlap of the third entity varied from day 5 to day 42. The
sequence of the entities differed among the reported cases. Albuminocytological dissociation in the CSF was detected in 4 cases
(days 1 to 21). Axonal neuropathy was observed in 4 cases, which
is consistent with previous reports that axonal rather than demyelinating forms of GBS overlap with MFS.10 Only 1 case reported
by Stevenson et al6 showed demyelinating neuropathy, which
exhibited the best prognosis of independent ambulation on day 27.
Anti-GQ1b antibodies are thought to cause ophthalmoplegia and
cerebellar-type ataxia.11 It is assumed that the impaired consciousness in BBE is also mediated by the expression of GQ1b
ganglioside in the reticular formation.1 Consistent with our review,
anti-Gq1b antibodies were detected in 4 of 6 cases.5–9 The clinical
features of our patient according to the new diagnostic classiﬁcation suggested by the GBS classiﬁcation group are summarized
in Figure 1.1 We concluded our patient to have BBE by reviewing
the diagnostic criteria suggested by Koga et al.12 BBE is characterized by the presence of anti-GQ1b antibodies and a typical
clinical picture of acute progressive external ophthalmoplegia,
ataxia, and impaired consciousness by 4 weeks, followed by
spontaneous recovery within 12 weeks after onset. The patient met
the diagnostic criteria for BBE except for uncertain recovery of
ataxia within 12 weeks, which is due to the severe weakness by
overlapping of GBS.
IVIG or plasma exchange (PE) monotherapy are recommended treatments for GBS. The combined treatment with
IVIG, PE, steroids, or immunoadsorption yielded no signiﬁcant
difference in patient outcome compared with monotherapy.2
However, there are no established treatment regimens or clinical trials for overlapping cases. As shown in Table 1, all of the
reported MFS-GBS-BBE overlapping cases were treated differently. After the initial treatment with IVIG or PE, additional
treatments such as multiple sessions of IVIG or PE, steroids,
and immunoadsorption were used in 4 cases. The deteriorating

TABLE 1. Reported Cases of Overlapping Miller Fisher Syndrome, Guillain-Barré Syndrome, and the Bickerstaff Brainstem Encephalitis

for 5 consecutive days. Her mental status began to recover to an alert
state from day 18 with a tendency to wax and wane. Her limb weakness
improved to MRC grade 3 on day 21; however, ventilator weaning was
delayed due to the impaired ventilation and copious secretions. A tracheostomy was performed on day 23 and mechanical ventilation was
removed on day 24. After recovery of consciousness, she showed a
cognitive decline compared with before the onset of the disease.
During the hospital days, rehabilitative strengthening exercises,
respiratory exercises, balance training, and occupational therapy were
gradually applied. She began to open her eyelids and move eyeballs
spontaneously on day 45. There was a large amount of aspiration during
a videoﬂuoroscopic study on day 48, which was caused by decreased
pharyngeal contraction; therefore, we decided to continue the Levin
tube feeding. She could sit on the side of the bed on day 53. After
discharge from our hospital (day 54), she underwent an outpatient daily
rehabilitation program. On day 69, she exhibited a normal swallowing
function and started a regular diet without difﬁculty. On day 150, her
muscle power was improved to MRC grade 4 in some proximal muscles
and she could stand unassisted for a short time. The peak cough ﬂow on
day 194 was 50 m/s due to persistent respiratory muscle weakness and
attempts to remove the tracheostomy failed. On day 247, she could not
ambulate independently, but she could walk indoors for a short distance
with the aid of a walker.

GBS Overlapping Syndrome

www.theneurologist.org | 129

Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

The Neurologist  Volume 23, Number 4, July 2018

Chae et al

FIGURE 1. The clinical course of the current patient showing all core clinical features of GBS, MFS, and BBE. The timing of recovery of
ataxia is uncertain. BBE indicates Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis; cGBS, classic Guillain-Barré syndrome; MFS, Miller Fisher syndrome.

course of overlap syndrome may result in inconsistent treatments. After 6 months, most patients with GBS and MFS show
independent ambulation, and 66% of BBE patients achieve
complete remission.4,13 However, the prognosis of MFS-GBSBBE overlapping cases has not yet been identiﬁed. Most
patients in previous case reports showed a favorable outcome at
6 months. However, after 8 months, the current patient, who
had underlying diabetic polyneuropathy and is the oldest
reported case to date, could not walk independently and the
tracheostomy was maintained. The most difﬁcult sequelae
remaining in our patient are the weakness in the respiratory
muscles and cognitive impairment. Considering the normal
arterial CO2 levels, her respiratory failure seems to be caused by
peripheral and cranial neuropathy rather than brainstem dysfunction. Cognitive decline was the least predicted sequela and
is thought to be an evidence of the involvement of central
nervous system. Rehabilitative training is continuing with an
emphasis on respiratory muscle exercise and cognitive training.
Multicenter studies are needed to identify appropriate treatment
strategies and predict the prognosis of overlapping cases.
REFERENCES
1. Wakerley BR, Uncini A, Yuki N. Guillain-Barre and Miller Fisher
syndromes—new diagnostic classification. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014;
10:537–544.
2. Willison HJ, Jacobs BC, van Doorn PA. Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Lancet. 2016;388:717–727.
3. Odaka M, Yuki N, Hirata K. Anti-GQ1b IgG antibody syndrome:
clinical and immunological range. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2001;70:50–55.

4. Dimachkie MM, Barohn RJ. Guillain-Barre syndrome and variants.
Neurol Clin. 2013;31:491–510.
5. Arai M, Odaka M, Yuki N, et al. A patient with overlapping
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis, Miller Fisher syndrome and
Guillain-Barre syndrome during the clinical course. Eur J Neurol.
2002;9:115–116.
6. Stevenson VL, Ferguson SM, Bain PG. Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis, Miller Fisher syndrome and Guillain-Barre syndrome
overlap with negative anti-GQ1b antibodies. Eur J Neurol. 2003;
10:187.
7. Fujii D, Manabe Y, Takahasi Y, et al. A case of fisher-bickerstaff
syndrome overlapped by guillain-barre syndrome. Case Rep
Neurol. 2012;4:212–215.
8. Han C, Wang Y, Jia J, et al. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis,
Miller Fisher syndrome and Guillain-Barre syndrome overlap in an
asthma patient with negative anti-ganglioside antibodies. BMC Res
Notes. 2012;5:295.
9. Pegg EJ, Chhetri SK, Lekwuwa UG, et al. An overlapping case of
Miller Fisher Syndrome, Bickerstaff’s Encephalitis, and the ASMAN
variant of Guillain-Barre syndrome. Case Rep Neurol Med. 2016;
2016:1596850.
10. Umapathi T, Tan EY, Kokubun N, et al. Non-demyelinating,
reversible conduction failure in Fisher syndrome and related
disorders. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83:941–948.
11. Hughes RA, Cornblath DR. Guillain-Barre syndrome. Lancet.
2005;366:1653–1666.
12. Koga M, Kusunoki S, Kaida K, et al. Nationwide survey of patients
in Japan with Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis: epidemiological
and clinical characteristics. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83:
1210–1215.
13. Odaka M, Yuki N, Yamada M, et al. Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis: clinical features of 62 cases and a subgroup associated
with Guillain-Barre syndrome. Brain. 2003;126:2279–2290.

130 | www.theneurologist.org
Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

