Funding information and disclosures are provided at the end of the article. Full disclosure form information provided by the authors is available with the full text of this article at Neurology.org/cp . Recovery from Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) may be protracted, and patients may need prolonged ventilatory support. We present clinical data from a tertiary referral weaning center managing patients with GBS requiring prolonged ventilatory support. A retrospective review of patients managed in a 34-bed specialist ventilator weaning facility in London, United Kingdom, between 2006 and 2017. Data including demographics, initial presentation, and ventilatory support were collected. Functional recovery and outcome data were collected between 12 months and 3 years following disease onset. Twenty-nine patients with severe GBS requiring prolonged ventilation were included. In several patients, coexisting conditions or complications affected the course. Seventy-six percent (n = 22) were successfully weaned from invasive ventilation with a median time to tracheostomy decannulation of 193 days (range: 49–527 days). Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV), as part of the weaning program, was applied in 59% (13/22), with 14% (3/22) requiring long-term nocturnal NIV. Twenty-four percent (7/29) were not decannulated, with 14% (4/29) supported on long-term invasive ventilation. Forty-five percent (10/22) weaned from invasive ventilation were able to achieve short distance–assisted ambulation. Mortality at 36 months was 17% (5/29), with 3 of these deaths occurring in patients invasively ventilated during their acute admission. GBS with severe respiratory muscle weakness and bulbar dysfunction may require prolonged invasive ventilation. However, there is potential for complete weaning from invasive mechanical ventilatory support with associated function recovery. These data highlight the importance of maintaining ongoing support and rehabilitation for patients with GBS requiring prolonged ventilation.
