Neurocrit Care (2012) 17:102–106
DOI 10.1007/s12028-012-9691-3

PRACTICAL PEARL

Bickerstaff’s Brainstem Encephalitis Presenting to the ICU
Gary Hunter • G. Bryan Young • Lee Cyn Ang

Published online: 24 May 2012
Ó Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

Abstract
Background Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis continues to pose a diagnostic and treatment challenge since the
original descriptions by Bickerstaff and Miller-Fisher. The
clinical syndrome overlaps with AIDP and MFS, but is
accompanied by decreased level of consciousness not
attributable to other causes, and the variable presence of
long-tract signs.
Methods The methods in this study include the case
presentation with autopsy findings of an elderly male presented with progressive weakness and impairment of
consciousness and the literature review.
Results Examination revealed areflexia and loss of most
brainstem reflexes. Some improvement occurred after
several weeks in the ICU, prior to death from pulmonary
embolism. Pathologic specimens were similar to others in
the literature, with inflammatory changes in nerve roots and
brainstem.
Conclusions The above findings led us to conclude that
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis remains a clinical
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s12028-012-9691-3) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
G. Hunter (&)
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University
of Saskatchewan, 112 3502 Taylor St. E., Saskatoon, SK S7V
1J1, Canada
e-mail: grwhunter@gmail.com
G. B. Young
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University
of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
L. C. Ang
Department of Pathology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada

123

diagnosis despite advances in electrophysiologic testing
and neuroimaging. BBE likely represents part of a spectrum,
overlapping with AIDP and MFS. Immunomodulation may
be helpful in shortening the clinical course.
Keywords Bickerstaff  Miller-Fisher  AIDP 
Combined demyelination

Case Summary
An 80-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency
department with difficulty with ambulation and generalized
weakness progressing over several days. There was
equivocal history of chronic lower back pain and possibly
some pain in the legs as well. There was no history of
preceding febrile illness. There was no history of paresthesias in the extremities. When he became unable to get
out of bed independently, he was taken to the emergency
room and admitted to the medicine service. While on the
ward, he developed features of delirium (disorientation and
agitation) and eventually decreased level of consciousness.
He required intubation for respiratory failure presumed
secondary to decreased consciousness, and the neurocritical care service was consulted on the first day of his ICU
stay as he was found to be unrousable after sedation was
stopped. Past medical history was significant for coronary
artery disease with bypass grafting several years prior,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, remote history of prostate
cancer treated with radiation, and smoking.
He showed no response to noxious stimulation administered supraorbitally or to the extremities. Respirations
were regular and shallow, and intermittently he spontaneously triggered the ventilator. Vital signs were within
normal limits and no vasopressor drugs were required. He

Neurocrit Care (2012) 17:102–106

showed bifacial weakness and tended to lie with the mouth
open, and with the eyes midline and immobile. Pupillary
responses were preserved, but the vestibulo-ocular reflex
was absent even with cold caloric testing. Corneal reflexes
were initially present, but disappeared on subsequent
examinations. The jaw jerk was brisk. Cough and gag
reflexes were absent. Tone was normal in the right upper
extremity and both legs, but the left arm demonstrated
persistent rigidity throughout range of motion that was
partially velocity-dependent. Reflexes in the extremities
were all absent and plantar responses were mute. Heart
sounds and there was no evidence of meningism, rash, or
adenopathy.
Initial blood work demonstrated no significant abnormalities aside from a mild leukocytosis. While in the ICU
the patient developed renal insufficiency, although this was
not felt to account for his impairment of consciousness as it
was a late finding and responded well to hydration alone.
EEG demonstrated mild slowing, and triphasic waves
suggestive of metabolic encephalopathy MRI of the brain
were essentially normal. MRI of the spine demonstrated
possible foci of epidural infection at 2 levels in the thoracic
spine, but no evidence of spinal cord compression. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis demonstrated mild lymphocytic
pleocytosis (62 wbc/mm3), and significantly elevated protein (1,513 mg/dl). Glucose was normal. Extensive
investigations for infectious agents were negative (HSV 1
and 2 PCR, EBV, CMV, VZV, bacterial cultures, fungal
elements, acid-fast bacilli, tuberculosis PCR, and West
Nile virus). Cytology and flow cytometry from the CSF
were negative for any neoplastic process. Serum and CSF
angiotensin converting enzyme levels were normal. Chest
X-ray was negative for adenopathy. Nerve conduction studies demonstrated mild slowing and decreased
amplitude, with some evidence of denervation on needle
electrode examination, suggestive of mixed demyelinating/
axonal polyneuropathy. The patient was treated for possible sepsis with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Only mild
fevers were documented early in the course of his illness,
and blood cultures were negative.
The patient’s condition persisted essentially unchanged
for almost 7 weeks. During that time, he was treated with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for 5 days, dexamethasone for 5 days, and received intravenous thiamine.
He eventually underwent tracheostomy and gastrostomy
tube insertion. He was transferred back to the ward after
approximately 6 weeks in the ICU (see video). One week
later, eye movements were noted to be improving, and
within a few days he was able to speak a few words and
was following commands with the right arm. Unfortunately, after approximately 2 months in hospital, the
patient unexpectedly died of pulmonary embolism.

103

Fig. 1 Trigeminal nerve roots with focal lymphocytic aggregates;
LFB/HE 9200

Fig. 2 Central chromatolysis of motor neurons in trigeminal motor
nucleus

Pathological Findings (Figs. 1, 2, 3)
Multiple sections through the brainstem showed a mild perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate, consisting of mainly
B-lymphocytes (CD20-positive) and scattered microglial
nodules. The neurons of oculomotor, trochlear, abducens,
facial, and hypoglossal nuclei were significant for central
chromatolysis. A mild lymphocytic infiltrate was also identified in the cranial nerves, especially the trigeminal nerve,
accompanied by ongoing axonal degeneration and loss.
Immunohistochemistry for HSV1, HSV2, EBV, CMV, and
varicella was negative in the brainstem sections. Sections
from the cervical, lumbar, and sacral spinal cord showed
anterior horn neurons with central chromatolysis and a mild
lymphocytic infiltrate in the spinal nerve roots and leptomeninges. Few Lewy bodies were noted in the amygdala, nucleus

123

104

Neurocrit Care (2012) 17:102–106

clinical features made a unified set of diagnostic criteria
challenging, and Bickerstaff’s opening comments from his
1951 paper highlight the original—and persistent—difficulties in understanding the condition, and the ongoing
importance of recognizing clinical syndromes:
Despite the advances of the recent decades in scientific
methods of investigation, conditions are not infrequently seen, particularly in neurological practice,
which fall outside the well-recognized syndromes and in
which it is possible to hazard only a guess at the etiological pathological processes involved. If the patient
recovers, the exact explanation may never be certain,
but one experience with such a condition may enable it
to be recognized again, and even in the face of ignorance
about its nature, some idea of its likely course and
prognosis may be formed.

Fig. 3 Migroglial nodule in dorsal motor nucleus of vagus; LFB/HE
9400

basalis, substantia nigra, and locus ceruleus. The pathologic
diagnosis was encephalomyeloradiculitis, and taking the
clinical setting into consideration, was consistent with Bickerstaff’s encephalitis.

Discussion
Between 1951 and 1957, Bickerstaff [1, 2] and Fisher [3]
separately described 11 cases of a newly recognized syndrome
characterized by variable combinations of ophthalmoplegia,
ataxia, impairment of reflexes, and altered consciousness,
ranging from drowsiness to coma. Owing to the common
findings of prodromal infections and albuminocytologic dissociation, an overlap with Guillain–Barre syndrome has
always been suspected, although only one of Bickerstaff’s first
eight cases had flaccid limb weakness. A summary of the
original 11 patients is seen in Table 1. The variability in

Since then, there have been many reports of overlap
syndromes with features of classic Fisher syndrome (FS;
ataxia, areflexia, and ophthalmoplegia) and Bickerstaff’s
brainstem encephalitis (BBE), with the larger series’
reported by Al-Din et al. in 1982 (with Bickerstaff as one
of the authors) [4], Odaka et al. in 2003 [5], and from Ito
et al. in 2008 [6]. In the largest report, the number of
patients with BBE was relatively small compared to those
with FS (53 vs. 466), but they found that the two groups
were relatively similar with respect to (BBE:FS): Serology
for anti-GQ1b antibodies (68 vs. 83 %), albuminocytologic
dissociation (46 vs. 76 %), MRI abnormalities (11 vs.
2 %), and EEG changes (57 vs. 25 %). One might argue
that these differences are more significant than the authors
propose, and that these findings are not necessarily ‘‘conclusive evidence’’ of an overlap between FS and BBE as
suggested in their discussion. The clinical data are perhaps
more convincing, since the median age, infectious prodrome, and initial symptoms were very similar. Reflexes

Table 1 Original 11 cases from Bickerstaff and Fisher (1951–1957) [1–3]
Case

Author, Year

Age, Gender

Prodrome

Consciousness

Ophthalmoplegia

Weakness

Reflexes

CSF

1

B, 1951

24, F

Malaise, headache

Drowsy, rousable

Y

Y (face)

NA

26 wbc

2

B, 1951

36, M

Malaise, headache

Drowsy, rousable

Y

Y (face)

Decreased

ACD

3

B, 1951

24, F

Headache

Drowsy, rousable

Y

Y (face)

NA

N

4

B, 1957

47, F

Vertigo, vomiting, HP

Drowsy

Y

Y (diffuse)

NA

N

5

B, 1957

11, M

Malaise, headache

Drowsy

Y

Y (diffuse)

Absent

12 wbc

6

B, 1957

10, M

Malaise, headache

Drowsy

NA

Y (face)

NA

28 wbc

7

B, 1957

10, M

Malaise, headache

Drowsy

Y

Y (face)

Absent

65 wbc

8

B, 1957

14, M

Malaise, myalgias

Drowsy

Y

Y (face)

Absent

ACD

9

F, 1956

Malaise

NA

Y

Y (diffuse)

Absent

ACD

10
11

F, 1956
F, 1956

Malaise
Headache

Drowsy
NA

Y
Y

NA
NA

Absent
Absent

N
N

B Bickerstaff, F Fisher, ACD albuminocytologic dissociation, wbc white blood cell count, NA not assessed

123

Neurocrit Care (2012) 17:102–106
Table 2 Differential diagnosis
of Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis

105

Syndrome

Similarities

Differences

Brainstem stroke
or hemorrhage

Ophthalmoplegia, coma,
UMN signs

Acute onset
No LMN signs in extremities
Posturing
Normal CSF

Wenicke’s
encephalopathy

Botulism

Myasthenia gravis

Ophthalmoplegia,
encephalopathy

Malnutrition, alcohol abuse

May have impaired
reflexes (beriberi)

No UMN signs

Ataxia
Ophthalmoplegia

Normal CSF
Early loss of pupillary responses

Weakness

Nausea and vomiting

LMN dysfunction

More than one patient presenting

Ophthalmoplegia and
bulbar symptoms

Normal mental status (unless hypoxic/
hypercapnic)

Weakness

Fluctuating symptoms, asymmetric
ophthalmoplegia
Normal reflexes

Brainstem neoplasm

ADEM

Ophthalmoplegia
and CN deficits

No prodrome
Usually less acute

Impaired consciousness

No prodrome

Gradual onset

Normal CSF

UMN signs

No LMN signs in extremities/
decreased reflexes

May involve brainstem

Very abnormal MRI including
supratentorial structures

Prodrome

May have less protein in CSF

UMN signs

No LMN signs/decreased reflexes

CSF may be similar
Meningeal infiltration
(sarcoid, neoplastic)
ADEM acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis, UMN upper
motor neuron, LMN lower
motor neuron, CN cranial nerve,
CSF cerebrospinal fluid, MRI
magnetic resonance imaging

CN palsies

History of cancer, weight loss,
systemic symptoms

Prodrome

Prominent headache

Impaired consciousness

Less likely signs of neuropathy/
decreased reflexes

Abnormal CSF

were decreased or absent in all of the FS patients by definition, and 60 % of the BBE group. Extensor plantar
responses were found in 38 % of the BBE group and none
of the FS patients. Impaired consciousness was appropriately required for a diagnosis of BBE in this study, and
20 % were comatose.
In the largest series of patients with pure BBE, Odaka
et al. [5] reported on 62 patients with progressive, relatively
symmetric external ophthalmoplegia and ataxia within
4 weeks. Patients were only included if they also demonstrated disturbance of consciousness or hyper-reflexia, and if
other causes were excluded. Important alternate diagnostic
considerations are shown in Table 2. Altered consciousness
was reported in 74 %, with 29 % showing ‘‘stupor’’ or more
severe impairment including coma. Reflexes were absent or

Low CSF glucose in neoplastic disease
Adenopathy on X-ray in sarcoid

decreased in 58 %, albuminocytologic dissociation was seen
in up to 57 % after the third week. CSF pleocytosis was seen
in up to 36 % in the first week, significantly more commonly
than in other autoimmune neuropathies such as Guillain–
Barre Syndrome (GBS) or MFS. Association with GQ1b
antibodies is also supported in this series, with 66 % of
patients showing high titers. Electroencephalographic
(EEG) studies were abnormal in 70 %, mainly showing
diffuse slowing in the theta and delta frequencies. MRI
findings were variable with one-third showing non-specific
changes in the brainstem, thalamus, cerebellum, and or
cerebrum. Neurophysiologic studies strongly supported a
primarily axonal process, suggesting some overlap
with acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) subtype of
GBS.

123

106

One patient from this series underwent autopsy, following
a clinical course with striking similarities to ours. This was a
37-year-old patient who developed ophthalmoplegia, weakness, areflexia, and coma after an upper-respiratory illness.
Coma persisted for 3 weeks. Neurophysiology showed primarily axonal dysfunction, and CSF showed pleocytosis. He
was alert by day 33 but suddenly died from respiratory causes
on day 45. Histologic findings in the brainstem included perivascular lymphocytic cuffing and glial nodules. Interestingly,
this case also demonstrated marked central chromatolysis of
the trigeminal motor nucleus cell bodies, and similar findings
in anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. Few other autopsy
reports are available—Al-Din et al. [4] reported one case
showing microglia and lymphocytic cuffing, and Bickerstaff
[2] reported one case with only ‘‘remarkably scanty’’
abnormalities.
Pathophysiologic differences between usual ‘‘peripheral’’ autoimmune neuropathies and central manifestations
are speculative, but other syndromes may have relevance to
understanding BBE. One such condition is severe combined demyelination syndrome, which presents as either
typical AIDP followed by symptoms and signs of acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis, or vice versa [7]. In some
reports, the onset appears to be truly simultaneous [8],
whereas in others, including a recent case at our center
(unpublished data), there is clearly a delay between the two
events. These cases raise the possibility of a ‘‘two-hit’’
pathogenesis, wherein a primary inflammatory process in
one compartment could feasibly lead to antigen presentation in the other and a second wave of inflammation against
a similar epitope. Given that these cases are rare, studying
optimal interventions is difficult, but early aggressive
immunosuppression may be warranted. Options include
combined IVIG and steroids, or simply a second stage of
treatment when a second phase of disease becomes
apparent. Interestingly, in most cases of BBE, the cerebral
white matter is generally spared [9–12].

Conclusions
Since the original description by two observant clinicians,
understanding of the entity known as BBE has changed
little—this is perhaps as much a testament to their skill as it
is a humbling acknowledgment of our ongoing limitations,
despite decades of advances in medical technology and
imaging. It seems clear that there is significant overlap
between BBE and other autoimmune neuropathies for the

123

Neurocrit Care (2012) 17:102–106

reasons cited above, which have now been repeatedly
documented. However, the relevant contributions of central
and peripheral processes to each of the clinical findings
remains unclear, as do the optimal treatments. This case
adds significantly to the paucity of available pathologic
data in BBE, and the findings are similar to those few cases
that have previously reported. We agree that the disorder is
probably one form of a spectrum of disorders including all
of the acute autoimmune neuropathies, perhaps most closely related to MFS and AMAN. Ultimately, Bickerstaff’s
comments remain as true today as for the original cases,
and ongoing efforts toward comprehensive understanding
are needed.

References
1. Bickerstaff ER, Cloake PC. Mesencephalitis and rhombencephalitis. Br Med J. 1951;2(4723):77–81.
2. Bickerstaff ER. Brain-stem encephalitis; further observations on a
grave syndrome with benign prognosis. Br Med J. 1957;1(5032):
1384–7.
3. Fisher M. An unusual variant of acute idiopathic polyneuritis (syndrome of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and areflexia). N Engl J Med.
1956;255(2):57–65.
4. Al-Din AN, Anderson M, Bickerstaff ER, Harvey I. Brainstem
encephalitis and the syndrome of Miller Fisher: a clinical study.
Brain. 1982;105(Pt 3):481–95.
5. Odaka M, Yuki N, Yamada M, Koga M, Takemi T, Hirata K,
Kuwabara S. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis: clinical features of 62 cases and a subgroup associated with Guillain-Barré
syndrome. Brain. 2003;126(Pt 10):2279–90.
6. Ito M, Kuwabara S, Odaka M, Misawa S, Koga M, Hirata K,
Yuki N. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis and Fisher syndrome form a continuous spectrum: clinical analysis of 581 cases.
J Neurol. 2008;255(5):674–82.
7. Bernard G, Riou E, Rosenblatt B, Dilenge ME, Poulin C.
Simultaneous Guillain-Barré syndrome and acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis in the pediatric population. J Child Neurol.
2008;23(7):752–7.
8. Amit R, Glick B, Itzchak Y, Dgani Y, Meyeir S. Acute severe
combined demyelination. Childs Nerv Syst. 1992;8(6):354–6.
9. Mondéjar RR, Santos JM, Villalba EF. MRI findings in a
remitting-relapsing case of Bickerstaff encephalitis. Neuroradiology. 2002;44(5):411–4.
10. Weidauer S, Ziemann U, Thomalske C, Gaa J, Lanfermann H,
Zanella FE. Vasogenic edema in Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis: a serial MRI study. Neurology. 2003;61(6):836–8.
11. Berkowicz T, Siger-Zajdel M, Zaleski K, Sokołowska D,
Wendorff J, Selmaj K. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis—an
analysis of clinical and MRI findings. Neurol Neurochir Pol.
2006;40(1):16–21.
12. Hori S, Fukuda O, Koyama S, Kameda H, Takahashi T, Endo S.
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis with positive findings on
head MRI—case report. Brain Nerve. 2008;60(3):287–90. In
Japanese.

