Citation: Kawamura N, et al. Anti-neurofascin antibody in patients with combined central and peripheral demyelination. Neurology. 2013;81(8):714-722. PMID: 23884033
Source: PDF extraction

---


--- Page 1 ---
Nobutoshi Kawamura,
MD, PhD*
Ryo Yamasaki, MD,
PhD*
Tomomi Yonekawa, MD
Takuya Matsushita, MD,
PhD
Susumu Kusunoki, MD,
PhD
Shigemi Nagayama, MD,
PhD
Yasuo Fukuda, MD, PhD
Hidenori Ogata, MD
Dai Matsuse, MD, PhD
Hiroyuki Murai, MD,
PhD
Jun-ichi Kira, MD, PhD
Correspondence to
Dr. Kira:
kira@neuro.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Supplemental data at
www.neurology.orgAnti-neurofascin antibody in patients with
combined central and peripheral
demyelination
ABSTRACT
Objectives: We aimed to identify the target antigens for combined central and peripheral demye-
lination (CCPD).
Methods: We screened target antigens by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting using
peripheral nerve tissues to identify target antigens recognized by serum antibodies from selected
CCPD and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) cases. We then
measured the level of antibody to the relevant antigen in 7 patients with CCPD, 16 patients with
CIDP, 20 patients with multiple sclerosis, 20 patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome, 21 patients
with other neuropathies, and 23 healthy controls (HC) by ELISA and cell-based assays using
HEK293 cells.
Results: At the initial screening, sera from 2 patients with CCPD showed cross-like binding to sci-
atic nerve sections at fixed intervals, with nearly perfect colocalization with neurofascin immu-
nostaining at the node and paranode. ELISA with recombinant neurofascin revealed
significantly higher mean optical density values in the CCPD group than in other disease groups
and HC. Anti-neurofascin antibody positivity rates were 86% in patients with CCPD, 10% in
patients with multiple sclerosis, 25% in patients with CIDP, 15% in patients with Guillain-Barré
syndrome, and 0% in patients with other neuropathies and HC. The cell-based assay detected
serum anti-neurofascin antibody in 5 of 7 patients with CCPD; all others were negative. CSF
samples examined from 2 patients with CCPD were both positive. In anti-neurofascin antibody –
positive CCPD patients, including those with a limited response to corticosteroids, IV immuno-
globulin or plasma exchange alleviated the symptoms.
Conclusion: Anti-neurofascin antibody is frequently present in patients with CCPD. Recognition
of this antibody may be important, because patients with CCPD who are antibody positive
respond well to IV immunoglobulin or plasma exchange. Neurology/C2262013;81:714 –722
GLOSSARY
AIDP5acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; AMAN 5acute motor axonal neuropathy; Caspr5contactin-
associated protein 1; CCPD 5combined central and peripheral demyelination; CIDP5chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyradiculoneuropathy; GBS5Guillain-Barré syndrome; GFP5green fluorescent protein; HC5healthy controls; IgG5immu-
noglobulin G; MS5multiple sclerosis; NF5neurofascin; OCB5oligoclonal immunoglobulin G bands; OD5optical density; ON5
other neuropathies; PNS5peripheral nervous system; ROC5receiver operating characteristic.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) affects the CNS, with no involvement of the peripheral nervous sys-
tem (PNS). In contrast, chronic inflammator y demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
(CIDP) is typically restricted to the PNS and can be considered a peripheral nerve analog
of MS. However, the phenotype of CIDP is w ide and the disease can be associated with
CNS demyelination. Patients presenting with c ombined central and peripheral demyelina-
tion (CCPD) have occasionally been reported using various diagnostic names including
chronic demyelinating peripheral neuropathy as sociated with multifocal CNS demyelination,
peripheral neuropathy with MS, CIDP with CNS involvement, and relapsing demyelinating
disease affecting both the CNS and PNS.1CCPD currently has no clear clinical definition
*These authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
From the Departments of Neurology (N.K., T.Y., T.M., H.O., D.M., H.M., J.K.) and Neurological Therapeutics (R.Y.), Neurological Institute,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka; Department of Neurology (S.K.), School of Medicine, Kinki University, Osaka;
Department of Neurology (S.N.), Kanazawa Medical University; and Department of Neurology (Y.F.), Sasebo City General Hospital, Japan.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the ar ticle.
714 © 2013 American Academy of Neurology
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 2 ---
and appears to encompass heterogeneous
conditions including acute, relapsing, and
chronic subtypes.
This combined demyelinating condition has
r a i s e dt h ei s s u eo fw h e t h e rt h i si sau n i q u ec o n -
dition due to a common immunopathogenic
mechanism, or simple coincidence of restricted
demyelinating disorders (MS and CIDP). Sev-
eral clinical, laboratory, and neuroimaging fea-
t u r e si np a t i e n t sw i t hC C P Da r ea t y p i c a lf o r
MS, including bilateral optic neuritis, an absence
of oligoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) bands
(OCB), and gray matter involvement.2–4There-
fore, a distinct immune-mediated mechanism
causing both central and peripheral demyelina-
tion is postulated in this entity; however, no
antigenic target common to the CNS and
PNS has yet been identified. In this study, as
one of target antigens for CCPD, we identified
neurofascin, which is a member of the L1 sub-
group of adhesion molecules expressed at the
nodes of Ranvier and the paranodes in both
the CNS and PNS,5and characterized the clin-
ical profiles of anti-neurofascin antibody –positive
CCPD patients.
METHODS Patients. We obtained clinical data and sera from
7 patients with CCPD, 16 patients with CIDP based on the
research criteria for diagnosis of CIDP,620 patients with MS
according to the revised McDonald criteria,720 patients with
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) (10 with acute motor axonal
neuropathy [AMAN],87 with acute inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy [AIDP],8and 3 unclassified), 21 patients with
other neuropathies (ON), and 23 healthy controls (HC). Written
informed consent was obtained. All patients with CCPD were
confirmed to have CNS lesions suggestive of demyelination by
MRI and demyelinating neuropathy by peripheral nerve conduc-
tion studies. Among them, 3 cases (patients 1, 2, and 6 in the
table) were diagnosed with CCPD at Kyushu University Hospital
between 2001 and 2010 and used for initial screening. The other
4 cases were consecutively referred to Kyushu University from the
coauthors ’institutions in 2011 for the anti-neurofascin antibody
assay. All CCPD samples were subjected to immunoblotting,
ELISA, and cell-based assays. Only one patient in the MS group
had abnormal nerve conduction study findings due to carpal tun-
nel syndrome. Fourteen patients in the CIDP group showed typ-
ical symmetric distal and proximal weakness, while 2 patients had
asymmetric involvement. Four patients with CIDP had abnor-
malities on brain MRI: 3 with small ischemic lesions and one
with mild hydrocephalus. ON included inherited, vasculitic, and
diabetic neuropathies. Samples were collected from patients
receiving no immunologic treatments. There were no significant
differences in the age and sex of each group except for patients
with CCPD, who were younger than those in the other groups.
Immunofluorescence assay. The sciatic nerves of female
Sprague-Dawley rats were collected and frozen immediately after
dissection. Longitudinal sections of the sciatic nerves were fixedfor 3 minutes in 10% formalin just before immunohistochemical
staining. We performed an indirect immunofluorescence assay on
these samples using sera from human subjects (diluted 1:60) fol-
lowed by detection with a fluorescein-conjugated goat antibody
to human IgG (Southern Biotechnology Associates, Birmingham,
AL). We also undertook double immunostaining to characterize
the localization of patients ’IgG binding sites, using rabbit IgG
antibodies specific for neurofascin, gliomedin (Abcam Plc.,
Cambridge, UK), or contactin-associated protein 1 (Caspr) (Milli-
pore Corporation, Temecula, CA), together with an Alexa 594 –
conjugated antibody to rabbit IgG as a detector reagent (Southern
Biotechnology Associates). Images were captured using a fluores-
cence microscope (Biozero, BZ-8000; Keyence, Osaka, Japan).
Extraction of tissue proteins. Detailed methods for the extrac-
tion of tissue proteins are described in the e-Methods on the
Neurology®Web site at www.neurology.org.
Immunoblotting and immunoabsorption. Detailed methods
for immunoblotting using extracted PNS and CNS proteins and
recombinant rat neurofascin protein and immunoabsorption by
recombinant neurofascin protein are described in the e-Methods.
Cell-based assay. We also performed a cell-based anti-neurofascin
antibody detection assay using neurofascin-transfected cells.
Human embryonic kidney 293 cells maintained in medium con-
taining 10% fetal calf serum were seeded at 5,000 cells/well onto
8-well chamber slides 24 hours before transfection. Because neuro-
fascin has 2 major forms, neurofascin 186 (NF186) and neurofascin
155 (NF155), the cells were transfected with 100 ng/well of either
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-NF155 or GFP-NF186 fusion
protein expression vector containing a full-length cDNA encoding
human NF155 or NF186, respectively (OriGene Technologies,
Inc., Rockville, MD), using FuGENE6 transfection reagent (Roche,
Basel, Switzerland). After blocking with 10% goat serum, the GFP-
NF155 –expressing cells were incubated with human serum (1:100)
or CSF samples (1:1) diluted with Dulbecco ’s modified Eagle medium
for 1 hour at 37°C without cell fixation, washed in phosphate-buffered
saline, and then visualized using an Alexa 594 –conjugated goat anti-
body to human IgG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The fluorescence of
unfixed cells was observed using a confocal laser scanning microscope
(Nikon A1). The anti-neurofascin antibody assay was performed at
least twice for each sample, and those that gave a positive result twice
were deemed to be positive.
ELISA. We coated polystyrene microtiter ELISA plates (ICN
Biomedicals, Inc., Costa Mesa, CA) with recombinant rat neuro-
fascin protein (0.2 mg/well). After blocking, 50 mL of serum
(1:200) was applied to the wells at room temperature and plates
were incubated for 1 hour. After washing, we applied a horserad-
ish peroxidase –conjugated goat antibody to human IgG (1:1000;
Southern Biotechnology Associates) and developed the plates
using o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO). The optical density (OD) was quantified at 450 nm using
an Immunomini NJ-2300 plate reader (Inter Med, Osaka, Japan).
Statistical analysis. Data are expressed as means and SEM. We
used 1-way analysis of variance for comparisons of ages, and Fisher
exact probability test for comparisons of the frequencies of sex in each
group. We also used 1-way analysis of variance followed by Dunnett
multiple comparison tests for comparisons of the mean OD values in
each group (figure 3B). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves were generated and area under the curve was calculated to
estimate cutoff OD values for the anti-neurofascin ELISA assay to
accurately discriminate patients wi th CCPD. Statistical analyses were
performed using JMP 9.0.2, and the threshold for significance was set
atp,0.05.
Neurology 81 August 20, 2013 715
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 3 ---
Standard protocol approvals. The research protocol for this
retrospective study and the data privacy procedures for consented
samples were approved by the Kyushu University ethics commit-
tee (no. 24-100).
RESULTS Screening and identification of target proteins
in patients with CCPD and CIDP. During screening by
immunofluorescence assay, sera from controls showedno significant immunoreactivity toward the rat sciatic
nerve (figure 1A). Four patients with CIDP showed
diffuse binding of serum IgG to the myelin sheath
(figure 1B). Two patients with CCPD (patients
1 and 2) showed a characteristic pattern of serum
IgG binding to sections of sciatic nerves, with a
cross-like appearance at fixed intervals (figure 1C).Table Presentations of patients with CCPD
Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Patient 4 Patient 5 Patient 6 Patient 7
Age, y/sex 16/F 25/M 57/F 22/M 44/M 23/F 38/F
Initial symptoms CNS PNS and CNS PNS PNS CNS and
PNSCNS CNS and PNS
Age at CNS onset, y 16 23 56 18 44 10 38
Age at PNS onset, y 16 23 48 10 44 23 38
Temporal gap between
CNS and PNS onsetsSequential
(3 mo apart)Simultaneous Long interval
(8 y)Long interval
(8 y)Simultaneous Long interval
(10 y)Simultaneous
Laboratory data
Anti-NF155 antibody
(cell-based assay)
(serum)11 1 1 1 2 2
Anti-NF155 antibody
(ELISA)11 1 1 1 2 1
CSF protein, mg/dL 205 299 55 97 86 83 89
OCB 22 1 2 2 2 2
MRIs
Brain Multifocal WML;
Gd-enhancedDiffuse
WML; No Gd
enhancementMultifocal WML;
Gd-enhancedMultifocal
WML; No Gd
enhancementMultifocal
WMLMultifocal WML;
Gd-enhancedMultifocal WML
Spinal cord Normal Normal Multifocal short
lesionsMultifocal short
lesionsNormal Multifocal lesions Normal
Cauda equina Gd-enhanced;
HypertrophyNormal ND ND Normal Normal Normal
McDonald criteria
for MSFulfilled Unfulfilled Fulfilled Fulfilled Fulfilled Fulfilled Fulfilled
NCS
Prolonged DL 11 1 1 1 2 1
MCV slowing 11 1 1 1 1 1
CB or TD 11 1 1 2 1 1
Prolonged F-wave
latency11 ND ND 11 1
EFNS/PNS criteria
for CIDPDefinite Definite Definite Definite Definite Definite Definite
VEPs Normal Bilaterally
prolongedUnilaterally
prolongedUnilaterally
prolongedND Unilaterally
prolongedND
Treatment
Corticosteroids Effective for CNS but
ineffective for PNS
lesionsIneffective Partially
effectiveEffective for
CNS lesionsPartially
effectiveEffective for both
CNS and PNS
lesionsEffective for both
CNS and PNS
lesions
IVIg Effective Effective Effective ND Effective ND ND
PE Effective Effective Ineffective ND ND ND ND
Other drugs 22 AZT, INF b-1a/b
(insufficient)INFb-1b 2 INFb-1a 2
Abbreviations: AZT 5azidothymidine; CB 5conduction block; CCPD 5combined central and peripheral demyelination; CIDP 5chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; DL 5distal latency; EFNS/PNS 5European Federation of Neurological Societies and the Peripheral Nerve Society;
Gd5gadolinium; INF b5interferon b;I V I g5IV immunoglobulin; MCV 5motor conduction velocity; MS 5multiple sclerosis; NCS 5nerve conduction study;
ND5not done; NF 5neurofascin; OCB 5oligoclonal immunoglobulin G bands; PE 5plasma exchange; PNS 5peripheral nervous system; TD 5temporal
dispersion; VEP 5visual evoked potential; WML 5white matter lesion.
716 Neurology 81 August 20, 2013
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 4 ---
Dual labeling experiments for serum IgG binding and
nodal or paranodal proteins revealed a partial overlay of
serum IgG binding with gliomedin labeling at the node
of Ranvier and with Caspr labeling at the paranode. By
contrast, pan-neurofascin immunostaining showed
nearly perfect colocalization with serum IgG binding
at both the node and paranode (figure 1, D –L).
Immunoblotting experiments revealed that the
serum IgG from CCPD patient 1 bound to both
rat sciatic nerve (PNS) and spinal cord (CNS) lysates
as 2 dense bands and one additional thin band
between 100 and 150 kD (figure 2A). Serum from
patient 2 also showed 2 thick bands and one thin
band between 100 and 150 kD, and an additional
faint band between 150 and 250 kD. The mobility of
the 2 dense bands stained by the patients ’sera was in
accord with that stained by anti-NF155 monoclonal
antibody, but not with that stained by anti-NF186
polyclonal antibody. The 2 dense bands disappearedwhen the patients ’sera were preincubated with recom-
binant NF155 while the lower-molecular-weight thin
band in patients 1 and 2 and the higher-molecular-
weight faint band in patient 2 still existed (figure 2B).
NF155 comprises 2 isoforms , termed neurofascin 155
high and low (NF155H and NF155L, respectively),
which differ in terms of their N-linked glycosylation.9
These findings suggest that the 2 dense bands corre-
spond to NF155H and NF155L, whereas the lower-
molecular-weight band in patients 1 and 2 and the
higher-molecular-weight band in patient 2 were non-
specific. The other CCPD cases showed no clear bands
on immunoblotting.
Anti-neurofascin antibody in the cell-based assay and
ELISA in patients with CCPD and other neurologic
disorders and HC. We examined the presence/absence
of IgG antibody to neurofascin in patients with
CIDP, MS, AMAN, AIDP, and ON and HC usingFigure 1 Screening of target proteins in patients with CCPD
(A–C) Immunofluorescence analysis of rat sciatic nerve reacted with patients ’sera. Note the cross-like appearance in panel
C (arrows) and inset. (A) Control. (B) Patient with CIDP. (C) Patient with CCPD (patient 2 in the table). Bar: 100 mm. (D –L)
Double immunofluorescence analysis of the nodes of Ranvier in rat sciatic nerves reacted with CCPD patient ’s serum and
each specific antibody. (D, G, J) Serum from patient with CCPD. (E, H, K) Specific antibody indicated. (F, I, L) Merged images.
Almost perfect colocalizations are seen in panels J –L. Bar: 10 mm. CCPD 5combined central and peripheral demyelination;
CIDP5chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; IgG 5immunoglobulin G.
Neurology 81 August 20, 2013 717
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 5 ---
a cell-based assay and ELISA. In the cell-based assay,
antibodies against NF155 were detected in sera from
5 patients with CCPD (patients 1 –5 in the table),
whereas all others were negative (figure 3, A –C). In
patients 1 and 2, further analyses of CSF samplesconfirmed both to be positiv e for anti-NF155 antibody
(figure 3, D –F). However, these patients ’sera were
negative for NF186 in the cell-based assay (data not
shown). In the ELISA for NF155, among the 5 patients
with CCPD who were positive for anti-neurofascinFigure 2 Identification of anti-neurofascin antibody in sera of patients with CCPD
(A) Immunoblotting analysis of sera of patients with CCPD, serum from healthy control, anti-NF186 polyclonal antibody, and
anti-NF155 monoclonal antibody using rat CNS and PNS tissues (n 53) and rat recombinant neurofascin protein (r-NF155).
Pt.1 and 2 correspond to patients 1 and 2 in the table, respectively. Three bands are visible between 100 and 150 kD in
patients 1 and 2. The mobility of the 2 dense bands stained by the patients ’sera is in accord with that stained by anti-
NF155 monoclonal antibody, but not with that stained by anti-NF186 polyclonal antibody. The bands of the recombinant
NF155 protein and rat brain NF155 do not line up perfectly because recombinant NF155 is His-tagged, which causes it to
have a distinct electrophoretic mobility. The NF186 band is visible only in rat CNS samples because NF186 is mainly
expressed in CNS tissues.18(B) Immunoabsorption experiments using sera from patients 1 and 2. By preincubation of
diluted patients ’sera (1:100) with recombinant rat NF155 at 2 different concentrations, the 2 upper dense bands are
not visible while the lower thin band in patients 1 and 2 and the higher-molecular-weight thin band between 150 and 250 kD
in patient 2 still exist, suggesting that the patients ’antibodies specifically bind to NF155 while the lower thin band in both
patients and the higher-molecular-weight thin band in patient 2 are nonspecific. Ab 5antibody; CCPD 5combined central
and peripheral demyelination; NF 5neurofascin; PNS 5peripheral nervous system.
718 Neurology 81 August 20, 2013
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 6 ---
antibody in the cell-based assay, 3 showed very high
serum OD values (figure 3G, patients 1 –3 in the table)
and 2 had medium OD values (patients 4 and 5). One
patient with CCPD (patient 7) who showed a negative
result on the cell-based assay had a medium OD value
by ELISA. Mean OD values in patients with CCPD
were significantly higher than those in other disease
groups and HC (figure 3G). Logistic regression analysis
showed that when OD values of samples from patients
with CCPD were compared with samples from patientswith other neurologic disor ders, including MS, CIDP,
GBS, and ON, and samples from HC, the area under
the ROC curve was 0.95. When the cutoff point was
estimated from the ROC curve, the ideal cutoff
OD value was estimated as 0.435. According to the
cutoff point for the OD value, the numbers of anti-
neurofascin antibody –positive patients in each disease
category were as follows: 6/7 patients with CCPD
(86%); 2/20 patients with MS (10%); 4/16 patients
with CIDP (25%); 2/10 patients with AMAN (20%);
1/7 patients with AIDP (14.3%); 0/21 patients with
ON (0%); and 0/23 HC (0%). Sera from all CIDP,
MS, AMAN, and AIDP patients who had OD values
higher than the cutoff lev el by ELISA were found to be
negative by the cell-based assay (figure 3G, empty dots).
Case presentations and comparison of clinical features
between anti-neurofascin-positive and -negative CCPD
patients. The clinical findings of the 7 patients with
CCPD are summarized in the table, and each case is
described in appendix e-1. The age at onset in the 5
patients with CCPD who were anti-neurofascin anti-
body positive by the cell-based assay ranged from 16 to
48 years, and both sexes were involved (male:female,
2:3). The CNS and PNS were involved simultaneously
or with a short interval in 3, whereas 2 showed a long
interval between CNS and PNS involvement. All had
high CSF protein levels and one of the 5 had OCB.
Multifocal white matter lesions were seen in 4, with
contrast enhancement in 2, but one showed diffuse
white matter lesions (figure 4E), which is atypical of
MS. Spinal cord lesions were present in 2 of 5 on MRI.
Visual evoked potentials were abnormal in 4 of 5
patients examined. Four met the McDonald criteria,
while one did not. All fulfilled the established criteria
for CIDP (figure 4, F and G). In the 5 anti-neurofascin
antibody –positive CCPD patients, corticosteroids
were only partially effective or ineffective except in
one with a favorable response of the CNS lesions. IVIg
administrations were effective in all 4 patients that
received them, while plasma exchanges were effective
in 2 of 3. These clinical features were similar to those
of the 2 anti-neurofascin antibody –negative CCPD
patients; however, in both anti-neurofascin antibody –
seronegative CCPD patients, corticosteroids were effec-
tive for both CNS and PNS lesions.
DISCUSSION This study reveals the high frequency
of anti-neurofascin antibody in patients with CCPD.
We also confirmed that some patients with MS, CIDP,
AMAN, and AIDP were positive for anti-neurofascin
antibodies by ELISA, as reported previously. The dis-
crepancies among the results of the ELISA, immuno-
blotting, and cell-based assays may be attributable to
differences in epitope, i.e., linear or conformational,
as well as the sensitivities and specificities of the 3Figure 3 Detection of anti-neurofascin antibody in patients with CCPD
(A–F) Cell-based assay for anti-neurofascin antibody in CCPD patient ’ss e r u ma n dC S F .
Serum (1:100 dilution) (A –C) and CSF (1:1) (D –F) from patient 2 both react well to
HEK293 cells expressing human NF155 protein with a GFP-tag on the cell surface. Bar:
10mm. (G) Anti-neurofascin antibody titer determined by ELISA. Filled dots: patients who
were also positive by the cell-based assay (figure 2B). Empty dots: patients negative by the
cell-based assay. Mean values are indicated in each column. The number next to each dot
corresponds to the patient number in the table. The mean OD values and standard errors for
each group were as follows: CCPD: 0.81 60.14 (n 57); MS: 0.14 60.03 (n 520); CIDP:
0.2560.05 (n 516); GBS: 0.19 60.04 (n 520); ON: 0.10 60.02 (n 521); and HC: 0.11 6
0.02 (n 523). * p,0.05, *** p,0.001. CCPD 5combined central and peripheral demyeli-
nation; CIDP 5chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; GBS 5
Guillain-Barré syndrome; GFP 5green fluorescent protein; HC 5healthy controls; IgG 5
immunoglobulin G; MS 5multiple sclerosis; NF 5neurofascin; OD 5optical density;
ON5other neuropathies.
Neurology 81 August 20, 2013 719
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 7 ---
assays. Further refinement of the assay methods and a
large-scale study are called for to solve this issue in the
future. As CCPD is an extremely rare disease, only 3 of
the patients described were our own institutional cases.
Although selection bias was not completely eliminated,
on referral to our clinic for anti-neurofascin antibody
assay, no selection was made; therefore, we believe that
the recruitment of patients with CCPD would not
have severely distorted our findings.
With these reservations in mind, the following are
characteristic of CCPD patients with anti-neurofascin
antibodies: 1) CNS and PNS involvement occur either
simultaneously or sequentially with a short or long
interval; 2) peripheral nerve demyelination is indistin-
guishable from CIDP; 3) CNS involvement is mostly
typical for MS, in which spinal cord lesions and gado-
linium enhancement of the lesions can develop, but
occasionally atypical, demonstrating diffuse cerebral
white matter lesions; 4) CSF OCB are negative in most
cases while CSF protein levels show variable degrees of
increase; and 5) the response to corticosteroids is lim-
ited, while IVIg and plasma exchanges are beneficial for
both CNS and PNS lesions.
In a previous report, spreading of autoimmunity
from central to peripheral or peripheral to central
myelin was proposed in patients with either MS or
CIDP.8However, 3 of 5 patients with CCPD who
were positive for anti-neurofascin antibodies by thecell-based assay showed simultaneous or sequential
occurrence of both CNS and PNS lesions within a
short interval, suggesting that the anti-neurofascin
antibody can emerge at the onset or very early in
the course of the disease, which is contrary to the
epitope spreading hypothesis. By contrast, in the
other 2 anti-neurofascin antibody –positive cases with
a long interval between CNS and PNS lesion devel-
opment, anti-neurofascin antibody could be pro-
duced by epitope spreading. Nonetheless, such
secondarily produced antibody may exert pathogenic
actions extending the original lesions from the PNS to
the CNS or vice versa. The presence of anti-neurofascin
antibody in the CSF further supports its involvement
in the formation of CNS lesions in addition to the
PNS lesions. Anti-neurofascin antibody –positive
CCPD patients fulfilled the European Federation
of Neurological Societies/Peripheral Nerve Society
diagnostic criteria for CIDP.10By contrast, CNS
involvement was atypical in one anti-neurofascin
antibody –positive patient who had a chronic course
and showed diffuse white matter changes on brain
MRI. Of interest is that many reported patients with
CCPD, including our antibody-positive patients,
were negative for OCB, which are detected in
.90% of patients with MS.11These findings suggest
that anti-neurofascin antibody –positive CCPD
patients could have a somewhat distinct CNSFigure 4 Neuroimaging and electrophysiologic findings in representative patients with CCPD
(A–D) MRIs for patient 1. (A, B) Brain MRI fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images showing MS-like lesions in juxtaven-
tricular regions. (C) The cauda equina is contrast-enhanced (gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted image). (D) Enlarged cauda
equina (T2-weighted image). (E) Brain MRI (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image) for patient 2. Diffuse white matter
lesions are seen. (F, G) Nerve conduction study findings for patients 1 (F) and 2 (G). Severe conduction blocks with reduced
amplitudes and temporal dispersions are evident in these patients with CCPD. CCPD 5combined central and peripheral
demyelination; MS 5multiple sclerosis.
720 Neurology 81 August 20, 2013
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 8 ---
involvement from that in typical MS patients. It is
thus suggested that anti-neurofascin antibody –posi-
tive CCPD is a unique condition due to a common
immunopathogenic mechanism between CNS and
PNS demyelination rather than a simple coincidence
of MS and CIDP.
An autoantibody response to neurofascin has been
reported in patients with MS, particularly in those with
chronic progressive MS, and immune-mediated axonal
injury and a potential contribution to axonal pathology
have been proposed.12Autoantibody responses to neu-
rofascin were also reported in patients with GBS and
CIDP.13–15Among the patients with GBS and CIDP
in that study, only 4% were positive for neurofascin
by a cell-based assay, although CNS involvement
was not thoroughly examined in the positive cases.14
Two patients with CIDP who had high titers of anti-
neurofascin antibody by ELISA benefited from plasma
exchange.14Our findings are partly in accordance with
the observations described in a recent report,14and thus
suggest that a high titer of anti-neurofascin antibodies
recognizing neurofascin molecules expressed on the cell
membrane could also be associated with CCPD, and
might be pathogenic. In this case, the CNS and PNS
are possibly involved together, because neurofascin
exists in both tissues. In a small fraction of AMAN,
AIDP, CIDP, and MS cases with high titers of anti-
neurofascin antibody, as reported previously,12–15inves-
tigations for subclinical involvement of the CNS and
PNS may be recommended.
Neurofascins are transmembrane adhesion mole-
cules expressed at the nodes and paranodes of both
the CNS and PNS.5,16,17The 2 major isoforms of
neurofascin have different expression patterns.
NF186 is an axonal membrane protein contributing
to assembly of voltage-dependent sodium channels at
high concentrations at the node of Ranvier. NF155 is
expressed by glial cells (oligodendrocytes and Schwann
cells) at the paranodes and connects the myelin sheath
to the axon via binding to contactin-1 and Caspr. The
autoantibodies in patients with CCPD appear to rec-
ognize mainly NF155 that is present at the paranode
based on the findings of the cell-based assay and im-
munoabsorption experiments; however, some reactivity
against the node was also observed in immunohisto-
chemistry experiments using PNS tissue sections, sug-
gesting additional binding to NF186 at the nodal
axolemma in situ, at least in some patients. Our find-
ings indicate that autoantibodies attacking axo-glial
integrity at the paranodes and nodes, but not com-
pacted myelin, may cause inflammatory demyelination
in both the CNS and PNS. The beneficial responses to
IVIg and plasma exchanges in patients with CCPD
who are anti-neurofascin antibody positive also support
the notion that this autoantibody may contribute to the
demyelinating process. Thus, the results of our studysuggest that the presence of anti-neurofascin antibodies
is a potential diagnostic biomarker for patients with
CCPD who could benefit from IVIg and plasma
exchanges.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Dr. Kawamura and Dr. Yamasaki drafted the manuscript for content,
collected and statistically analyzed data. Dr. Yonekawa, Dr. Matsushita,
Dr. Kusunoki, Dr. Nagayama, Dr. Fukuda, Dr. Ogata, and Dr. Matsuse
collected data. Dr. Murai revised the manuscript for content. Dr. Kira
revised the manuscript for content, obtained the funding for this study,
and supervised the study.
STUDY FUNDING
Supported in part by a Health and Labour Sciences Research grant on
intractable diseases (H24-Nanchitou [Nan]-Ippan-055 and H23-Nanchi-
Ippan-017) from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan; by
a Scientific Research B grant (no. 22390178); and a Challenging Explor-
atory Research grant (no. 23659459) from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
DISCLOSURE
N. Kawamura, R. Yamasaki, and T. Yonekawa report no disclosures.
T. Matsushita has received speaker honoraria from Bayer Schering
Pharma, Biogen Idec, and Pfizer and receives research support from Bayer
Schering Pharma, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan,
the Japan Science and Technology Agency, the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and the Kaibara Mor-
ikazu Medical Science Promotion Foundation, Japan. S. Kusunoki serves
as an editorial board member of Experimental Neurology ,Journal of Neuro-
immunology , and Clinical & Experimental Neuroimmunology . He received
honoraria from Teijin Pharma Limited, Nihon Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd.,
and Benesis Corporation. He is funded by research grants from the Min-
istry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan, and grants from the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
S. Nagayama, Y. Fukuda, H. Ogata, and D. Matsuse report no disclosures.
H. Murai serves as associate editor of BMC Neurology , and receives research
support from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan (H22-
nanchi-shitei-002). J. Kira serves as an editorial board member of Multiple
Sclerosis Journal ,Multiple Sclerosis and Related Disorders ,BMC Medicine ,
PLoS ONE ,Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, Intractable and Rare Diseases
Research ,The Scientific World Journal ,a n d Journal of the Neurological Sci-
ences. He is a consultant for Biogen Idec Japan, and has received honoraria
from Bayer Healthcare and funding for a trip from Bayer Healthcare and
Biogen Idec Japan. He is funded by a research grant for nervous and mental
disorders from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan, and
grants from the Japan Science and Technology Agency and the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. Go to
Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received December 30, 2012. Accepted in final form May 6, 2013.
REFERENCES
1. Kamm C, Zettl UK. Autoimmune disorders affecting both
the central and peripheral nervous system. Autoimmun
Rev 2012;11:196 –202.
2. Zephir H, Stojkovic T, Latour P, et al. Relapsing demye-
linating disease affecting both the central and peripheral
nervous systems. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008;79:
1032–1039.
3. Pirko I, Kuntz NL, Patterson M, Keegan BM,
Weinshenker BG, Rodriguez M. Contrasting effects of
IFNbeta and IVIG in children with central and peripheral
demyelination. Neurology 2003;60:1697 –1699.
4. Thomas PK, Walker RW, Rudge P, et al. Chronic demyelin-
ating peripheral neuropathy associated with multifocal central
nervous system demyelination. Brain 1987;110(pt 1):53 –76.
Neurology 81 August 20, 2013 721
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE
--- Page 9 ---
5. Kriebel M, Wuchter J, Trinks S, Volkmer H. Neurofascin:
a switch between neuronal plasticity and stability. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol 2012;44:694 –697.
6. Research criteria for diagnosis of chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP). Report from an
Ad Hoc Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neu-
rology AIDS Task Force. Neurology 1991;41:617 –618.
7. Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic
criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDo-
nald criteria. Ann Neurol 2011;69:292 –302.
8. Ho TW, Mishu B, Li CY, et al. Guillain-Barré syndrome in
northern China: relationship to Campylobacter jejuni infection
and anti-glycolipid antibodies. Brain 1995;118(pt 3):597 –605.
9. Pomicter AD, Shroff SM, Fuss B, et al. Novel forms of
neurofascin 155 in the central nervous system: alterations
in paranodal disruption models and multiple sclerosis.
Brain 2010;133:389 –405.
10. European Federation of Neurological Societies/Peripheral
Nerve Society Guideline on management of chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy.
Report of a joint task force of the European Federation
of Neurological Societies and the Peripheral Nerve Society.
J Peripher Nerv Syst 2005;10:220 –228.
11. Link H, Huang YM. Oligoclonal bands in multiple
sclerosis cerebrospinal fluid: an update on methodologyand clinical usefulness. J Neuroimmunol 2006;180:
17–28.
12. Mathey EK, Derfuss T, Storch MK, et al. Neurofascin as a
novel target for autoantibody-mediated axonal injury.
J Exp Med 2007;204:2363 –2372.
13. Lonigro A, Devaux JJ. Disruption of neurofascin and glio-
medin at nodes of Ranvier precedes demyelination in
experimental allergic neuritis. Brain 2009;132:260 –273.
14. Ng JK, Malotka J, Kawakami N, et al. Neurofascin as a
target for autoantibodies in peripheral neuropathies. Neu-
rology 2012;79:2241 –2248.
15. Devaux JJ, Odaka M, Yuki N. Nodal proteins are target
antigens in Guillain-Barré syndrome. J Peripher Nerv Syst
2012;17:62 –71.
16. Ratcliffe CF, Westenbroek RE, Curtis R, Catterall WA.
Sodium channel beta1 and beta3 subunits associate with
neurofascin through their extracellular immunoglobulin-
like domain. J Cell Biol 2001;154:427 –434.
17. Sherman DL, Tait S, Melrose S, et al. Neurofascins are
required to establish axonal domains for saltatory conduc-
tion. Neuron 2005;48:737 –742.
18. Tait S, Gunn-Moore F, Collinson JM, et al. An oligoden-
drocyte cell adhesion molecule at the site of assembly of
the paranodal axo-glial junction. J Cell Biol 2000;150:
657–666.
Do You Know What is Happening to Neurology on
Capitol Hill?
Congress is making decisions that affect neurologic research funding and the way neurology is practiced
in the United States. Only Capitol Hill Report on AAN.com takes you behind Washington ’s closed doors
and shines a light on how your federal legislators are working for —or against —your interests. Read
Capitol Hill Report on AAN.com the second and fourth Monday of each month. Stay informed. Your
work depends on it.
We ’re Looking for Our Next Generation of Leaders
Applications are now being accepted to the American Academy of Neurology ’s 2013 Emerging
Leaders Forum. The program is designed to identify, orient, and cultivate future leaders of the
world ’s largest association of neurologists. Applicants must be members of the AAN 45 years of age
or younger —or no more than 13 years out of training.
Apply by September 1, 2013.
www.aan.com/view/leadership or contact Donna Honeyman at (612) 928-6055 or dhoneyman@aan.com .
722 Neurology 81 August 20, 2013
ª"NFSJDBO"DBEFNZPG/FVSPMPHZ6OBVUIPSJ[FESFQSPEVDUJPOPGUIJTBSUJDMFJTQSPIJCJUFE