IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •1IDSA GUIDELINES
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Management of Intravascular Catheter-RelatedInfection: 2009 Update by the Infectious DiseasesSociety of America
Leonard A. Mermel,1Michael Allon,2Emilio Bouza,9Donald E. Craven,3Patricia Flynn,4Naomi P. O’Grady,5
Issam I. Raad,6Bart J. A. Rijnders,10Robert J. Sherertz,7and David K. Warren8
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island;2University of Alabama-Birmingham
Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama;3Tufts University School of Medicine, Lahey Clinic Medical Center, Burlington, Massachusetts;4St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital, Children’s Infection Defense Center, Memphis, Tennessee;5National Institutes of Health, Critical Care Medicine
Department, Bethesda, Maryland;6Section of Infectious Diseases, University of Texas-Cancer Center, Houston;7Section of Infectious Diseases,
Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina;8Division of Infectious Diseases, Washington University School
of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri;9Servicio de Microbiologı ´a Cliı ´nica y E. Infecciosas Hospital General “Gregorio Maran ˜o´n,” Madrid, Spain;
and10Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
These updated guidelines replace the previous management guidelines published in 2001. The guidelines are
intended for use by health care providers who care for patients who either have these infections or may beat risk for them.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Diagnosis: Intravenous Catheter Cultures
General
1. Catheter cultures should be performed when a
catheter is removed for suspected catheter-related
bloodstream infection (CRBSI); catheter culturesshould not be obtained routinely (A-II).
2. Qualitative broth culture of catheter tips is not
recommended (A-II).
3. For central venous catheters (CVCs), the catheter
Received 16 March 2009; accepted 18 March 2009; electronically published 2
June 2009.
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual
variation among patients. They are not intended to supplant physician judgment
with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. The IDSA considersadherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determinationregarding their application to be made by the physician in the light of each patient’sindividual circumstances.
Reprints or corresponence: Dr. Leonard Mermel, Div. of Infectious Diseases,
Rhode Island Hospital, 593 Eddy St., Providence, RI 02903 (lmermel@lifespan.org).
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2009; 49:1–45
/H170502009 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved.
1058-4838/2009/4901-0001$15.00DOI: 10.1086/599376tip should be cultured, rather than the subcutaneous
segment (B-III).
4. For cultures of an anti-infective catheter tip, use
speciﬁc inhibitors in the culture media (A-II).
5. Growth of 115 colony-forming units (cfu) from
a 5-cm segment of the catheter tip by semiquantitative(roll-plate) culture or growth of
1102cfu from a cath-
eter by quantitative (sonication) broth culture reﬂectscatheter colonization (A-I).
6. When catheter infection is suspected and there is
a catheter exit site exudate, swab the drainage to collectspecimens for culture and Gram staining (B-III).
Short-term catheters, including arterial catheters.
7. For short-term catheter tip cultures, the roll plate
technique is recommended for routine clinical micro-biological analysis (A-II).
8. For suspected pulmonary artery catheter infec-
tion, culture the introducer tip (A-II).
Long-term catheters
9. Semiquantitative growth of
!15 cfu/plate of the
same microbe from both the insertion site culture andDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

2•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.
Figure 1. Methods for the diagnosis of acute fever for a patient suspected of having short-term central venous catheter infection or arterial catheter
infection. CFU, colony-forming units.the catheter hub culture strongly suggests that the catheter is
not the source of a bloodstream infection (A-II).
10. If a venous access subcutaneous port is removed for
suspected CRBSI, send the port to the microbiology laboratoryfor qualitative culture of the port reservoir contents, in additionto the catheter tip (B-II).
Diagnosis: Blood Cultures
11. Obtain samples for blood culture prior to the initiation
of antibiotic therapy (ﬁgure 1) (A-I).
12. Where available, a phlebotomy team should draw the
blood samples (A-II).
13. Skin preparation for obtaining percutaneously drawn
blood samples should be performed carefully, with use of ei-ther alcohol or tincture of iodine or alcoholic chlorhexidine(
10.5%), rather than povidone-iodine; allow adequate skin con-
tact and drying times to mitigate blood culture contamination(A-I).
14. If a blood sample is obtained through a catheter, clean
the catheter hub with either alcohol or tincture of iodine oralcoholic chlorhexidine (
10.5%), allowing adequate drying time
to mitigate blood culture contamination (A-I).
15. For suspected CRBSI, paired blood samples, drawn from
the catheter and a peripheral vein, should be cultured before
initiation of antimicrobial therapy, and the bottles should beappropriately marked to reﬂect the site from which the samples
were obtained (A-II).
16. If a blood sample cannot be drawn from a peripheral
vein, it is recommended that /H110912 blood samples should be
drawn through different catheter lumens (B-III). It is unclear
whether blood cultures should be drawn through all catheterlumens in such circumstances (C-III).
17. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of CRBSI requires that the same
organism grow from at least 1 percutaneous blood culture andfrom a culture of the catheter tip (A-I), or that 2 blood samplesbe drawn (one from a catheter hub and the other from aperipheral vein) that, when cultured, meet CRBSI criteria forquantitative blood cultures or differential time to positivity(DTP) (A-II). Alternatively, 2 quantitative blood cultures ofsamples obtained through 2 catheter lumens in which the col-ony count for the blood sample drawn through one lumen isat least 3-fold greater than the colony count for the bloodDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •3sample obtained from the second lumen should be considered
to indicate possible CRBSI (B-II). In this circumstance, theinterpretation of blood cultures that meet the DTP criteria isan unresolved issue (C-III).
18. For quantitative blood cultures, a colony count of mi-
crobes grown from blood obtained through the catheter hubthat is at least 3-fold greater than the colony count from bloodobtained from a peripheral vein best deﬁnes CRBSI (A-II).
19. For DTP , growth of microbes from a blood sample drawn
from a catheter hub at least 2 h before microbial growth isdetected in a blood sample obtained from a peripheral veinbest deﬁnes CRBSI (A-II).
20. Quantitative blood cultures and/or DTP should be per-
formed before initiating antimicrobial therapy and with thesame volume of blood per bottle (A-II).
21. Evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend that blood cul-
tures be routinely performed after discontinuation of antimi-crobial therapy for CRBSI (C-III).
General Management of Catheter-Related Infection
22. When denoting duration of antimicrobial therapy, day
1 is the ﬁrst day on which negative blood culture results areobtained (C-III).
23. Vancomycin is recommended for empirical therapy in
heath care settings with an elevated prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA); for institutions in
which the preponderance of MRSA isolates have vancomycinminimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values
12mg/mL,
alternative agents, such as daptomycin, should be used (A-II).
24. Linezolid should not be used for empirical therapy (i.e.,
for patients suspected but not proven to have CRBSI) (A-I).
25. Empirical coverage for gram-negative bacilli should be
based on local antimicrobial susceptibility data and the severityof disease (e.g., a fourth-generation cephalosporin, carbape-nem, or b-lactam/b -lactamase combination, with or without
an aminoglycoside) (A-II).
26. Empirical combination antibiotic coverage for multi-
drug-resistant (MDR) gram-negative bacilli, such as Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa, should be used when CRBSI is suspected in
neutropenic patients, severely ill patients with sepsis, or patientsknown to be colonized with such pathogens, until the cultureand susceptibility data are available and de-escalation of theantibiotic regimen can be done (A-II).
27. In addition to coverage for gram-positive pathogens, em-
pirical therapy for suspected CRBSI involving femoral cathetersin critically ill patients should include coverage for gram-neg-ative bacilli and Candida species (A-II).
28. Empirical therapy for suspected catheter-related candi-
demia should be used for septic patients with any of the fol-lowing risk factors: total parenteral nutrition, prolonged use ofbroad-spectrum antibiotics, hematologic malignancy, receipt ofbone marrow or solid-organ transplant, femoral catheteriza-
tion, or colonization due to Candida species at multiple sites
(B-II).
29. For empirical treatment of suspected catheter-related
candidemia, use an echinocandin or, in selected patients, ﬂu-conazole (A-II). Fluconazole can be used for patients withoutazole exposure in the previous 3 months and in health caresettings where the risk of Candida krusei orCandida glabrata
infection is very low (A-III).
30. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used for catheter sal-
vage (B-II); however, if antibiotic lock therapy cannot be usedin this situation, systemic antibiotics should be administeredthrough the colonized catheter (C-III).
31. Four to 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy should be admin-
istered to patients with persistent fungemia or bacteremia aftercatheter removal (i.e., occurring
172 h after catheter removal)
(A-II for S. aureus infection; C-III for infection due to other
pathogens), to patients who are found to have infective en-docarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis, and to pediatricpatients with osteomyelitis; 6–8 weeks of therapy should beused for the treatment of osteomyelitis in adults (ﬁgures 2 and3) (A-II).
32. Long-term catheters should be removed from patients
with CRBSI associated with any of the following conditions:
severe sepsis; suppurative thrombophlebitis; endocarditis;
bloodstream infection that continues despite
172 h of anti-
microbial therapy to which the infecting microbes are suscep-tible; or infections due to S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, fungi, or
mycobacteria (A-II). Short-term catheters should be removedfrom patients with CRBSI due to gram-negative bacilli, S. au-
reus, enterococci, fungi, and mycobacteria (A-II).
33. For patients with CRBSI for whom catheter salvage is
attempted, additional blood cultures should be obtained, and
the catheter should be removed if blood culture results (e.g.,
2 sets of blood cultures obtained on a given day; 1 set of blood
cultures is acceptable for neonates) remain positive when blood
samples are obtained 72 h after the initiation of appropriatetherapy (B-II).
34. For long-term and short-term CRBSI due to less virulent
microbes that are difﬁcult to eradicate (e.g., Bacillus species,
Micrococcus species, or Propionibacteria), catheters should
generally be removed after blood culture contamination isruled out on the basis of multiple positive culture results,with at least 1 blood culture sample drawn from a peripheral
vein (B-III).
35. In uncomplicated CRBSI involving long-term catheters
due to pathogens other than S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus
species, Micrococcus species, Propionibacteria, fungi, or my-
cobacteria, because of the limited access sites in many patients
who require long-term intravascular access for survival (e.g.,patients undergoing hemodialysis or with short-gut syndrome),Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

4•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.
Figure 2. Approach to the management of patients with short-term central venous catheter–related or arterial catheter–related bloodstream infection.
CFU, colony-forming units; S. aureus, Staphylococcus aureus.
treatment should be attempted without catheter removal, with
use of both systemic and antimicrobial lock therapy (B-II).
36. After a positive blood culture result is reported that may
represent CRBSI, automated standardized treatment advice canbe formulated to improve compliance with Infectious DiseasesSociety of America (IDSA) guidelines (B-II).
37. Urokinase and other thrombolytic agents are not rec-
ommended as adjunctive therapy for patients with CRBSI(B-I).
38. If a catheterized patient has a single positive blood cul-
ture that grows coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species, then
additional cultures of blood samples obtained through the sus-pected catheter and from a peripheral vein should be performedbefore the initiation of antimicrobial therapy and/or catheterremoval to be certain that the patient has true bloodstreaminfection and that the catheter is the likely source (A-II).
Recommendations related to the unique aspects of the follow-
ing subjects may also be found in the text: treating short-termperipheral venous catheters, nontunneled and long-term CVCs,implanted catheter–related infections (other than infections re-lated to hemodialysis catheters), treatment of pediatric patientswith catheter-related infections, and treatment of infections re-lated to hemodialysis catheters. Recommendations are alsomade regarding antibiotic lock therapy, pathogen-speciﬁc treat-ment, management of suppurative thrombophlebitis, manage-ment of persistent bloodstream infection, and detection andmanagement of an outbreak of CRBSI. A full listing of allrecommendations may be found in table 1.
INTRODUCTION
In 2001, the IDSA published a clinical practice guideline on
the management of intravascular catheter-related infection [1].IDSA updates its guidelines when new data or publicationsmight change a prior recommendation or when the ExpertPanel feels clariﬁcations or additional guidance are warranted.For the 2009 Update, the indications for treatment and agentsof choice from the 2001 guideline were reviewed [1]. The pre-vious document is a source for a more detailed review of earlierstudies.
The Expert Panel addressed the following clinical questions
in the 2009 Update:
I. Diagnosis: when and how should catheter cultures and
blood cultures be done?
II. How should catheter-related infections generally be
managed?
III. What are the unique aspects of treating infections as-
sociated with short-term peripheral venous catheters?
IV . What are the unique aspects of treating infections as-
sociated with nontunneled CVCs and arterial catheters?
V . What are the unique aspects of treating infections asso-
ciated with long-term CVCs or implanted catheter–related in-fections other than those related to hemodialysis catheters?Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •5
Figure 3. Approach to the treatment of a patient with a long-term central venous catheter (CVC) or a port (P)-related bloodstream infection.
VI. What are the unique aspects of treating pediatric patients
who have catheter-related infections?
VII. What are the unique aspects of managing patients who
receive hemodialysis through catheters for whom catheter-re-
lated infection is suspected or proven?
VIII. What is antibiotic lock therapy, and how is it used to
manage patients with catheter-related infection?
IX. Are there pathogen-speciﬁc treatment recommendations?X. How should you manage suppurative thrombophlebitis?XI. How are persistent bloodstream infection and infective
endocarditis managed?
XII. How would you detect and manage a possible outbreak
of CRBSI?
Practice guidelines and update methodology. “Practice
guidelines are systematically developed statements to assistpractitioners and patients in making decisions about appro-priate health care for speciﬁc clinical circumstances” [2, p. 8].Attributes of good guidelines include validity, reliability, re-producibility, clinical applicability, clinical ﬂexibility, clarity,multidisciplinary process, review of evidence, and documen-tation [2].
Expert Panel composition. The IDSA Standards and Prac-
tice Guidelines Committee convened a multidisciplinary panelof experts in the management of intravascular catheter-relatedinfections. Expert Panel participants included representativesfrom the following collaborating organizations: European So-
ciety of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, PediatricInfectious Diseases Society, American Society of Nephrology,Society for Critical Care Medicine, and the Society for Health-care Epidemiology of America.
Literature review and analysis. For the 2009 update, the
Expert Panel completed the review and analysis of data pub-lished from January 2001 through June 2008. Data publishedafter June 2008 were also considered in the ﬁnal preparationof the guideline. Computerized literature searches of thePubMed database were performed with combinations of thefollowing search terms: “catheter-related,” “infections,” “cul-tures,” “management,” “treatment,” “peripheral,” “non-tun-neled,” “central venous catheter,” “arterial catheter,” “im-planted catheter,” “pediatric,” ”hemodialysis,” “antibiotic lock,”“bacteremia” “suppurative thrombophlebitis,” “endocarditis,”and “outbreak.”
Process overview. In evaluating the evidence regarding the
management of intravascular catheter–related infections, theExpert Panel followed a process used in the development ofother IDSA guidelines. The process included a systematicweighting of the quality of the evidence and the grade of rec-
ommendation (table 2) [3].
Consensus development on the basis of evidence. The
Expert Panel met face-to-face on 1 occasion and via telecon-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

6Table 1. Summary of recommendations for the diagnosis and management of intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infection
(CRBSI).
Recommendation CommentsStrength or
quality of
recommendation Reference(s)
Diagnosis: when and how should catheter cultures
and blood cultures be done?
Intravenous catheter cultures
General
1. Catheter cultures should be performed when a catheter
is removed for suspected CRBSI; catheter cultures
should not be obtained routinelyA-II [22, 26]
2. Qualitative broth culture of catheter tips is not
recommendedA-II [22, 23]
3. For central venous catheters (CVCs), the catheter tip
should be cultured, rather than the subcutaneoussegmentB-III [20]
4. For cultures of an anti-infective catheter tip, use speciﬁc
inhibitors in the culture mediaA-II [31, 32]
5. Growth of 115 cfu from a 5-cm segment of the catheter
tip by semiquantitative (roll-plate) culture or growth of
1102cfu from a catheter by quantitative (sonication)
broth culture reﬂects catheter colonizationA-I [22, 23, 27]
6. When catheter infection is suspected and there is a
catheter exit site exudate, swab the drainage to col-lect specimens for culture and Gram stainingB-III [1, 33]
Short-term catheters, including arterial catheters
7. For short-term catheter tip cultures, the roll plate tech-
nique is recommended for routine clinical microbiologi-cal analysisA-II [27]
8. For suspected pulmonary artery catheter infection, cul-
ture the introducer tipA-II [21]
Long-term catheters
9. Semiquantitative growth of !15 cfu/plate of the same
microbe from both the insertion site culture and thecatheter hub culture strongly suggests that the cathe-ter is not the source of a bloodstream infectionA-II [33]
10. If a venous access subcutaneous port is removed for
suspected CRBSI, send the port to the microbiologylaboratory for qualitative culture of the port reservoircontents, in addition to the catheter tipB-II [28–30]
Blood cultures
11. Obtain samples for blood culture prior to the initiation of
antibiotic therapy (ﬁgure 1)A-I
12. Where available, a phlebotomy team should draw the
blood samplesA-II [38]
13. Skin preparation for obtaining percutaneously drawn
blood samples should be performed carefully, with useof either alcohol or tincture of iodine or alcoholic chlor-hexidine (
10.5%), rather than povidone-iodine; allow
adequate skin contact and drying times to mitigateblood culture contaminationA-I [39, 40]
14. If a blood sample is obtained through a catheter, clean
the catheter hub with either alcohol or tincture of io-dine or alcoholic chlorhexidine (
10.5%), allowing ade-
quate drying time to mitigate blood culturecontaminationA-I
15. For suspected CRBSI, paired blood samples, drawn from
the catheter and a peripheral vein, should be culturedbefore initiation of antimicrobial therapy, and the bot-tles should be appropriately marked to reﬂect the sitefrom which the samples were obtainedA-II [33, 44, 45]
16. If a blood sample cannot be drawn from a peripheral
vein, it is recommended that /H110912 blood samples
should be drawn through different catheter lumensB-III [36]
It is unclear whether blood cultures should be drawn
through all catheter lumens in such circumstancesC-IIIDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

717. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of CRBSI requires that the same
organism grow from at least 1 percutaneous blood cul-
ture and from a culture of the catheter tipA-I
Or that 2 blood samples be drawn (one from a catheter
hub and the other from a peripheral vein) that, whencultured, meet CRBSI criteria for quantitative bloodcultures or DTPA-II [35, 49]
Alternatively, 2 quantitative blood cultures of samples ob-
tained through 2 catheter lumens in which the colonycount for the blood sample drawn through one lumenis at least 3-fold greater than the colony count for theblood sample obtained from the second lumen shouldbe considered to indicate possible CRBSIB-II [36]
In this circumstance, the interpretation of blood cultures
that meet the DTP criteria is an unresolved issueC-III [36]
18. For quantitative blood cultures, a colony count of mi-
crobes grown from blood obtained through the cathe-ter hub that is at least 3-fold greater than the colonycount from blood obtained from a peripheral vein bestdeﬁnes CRBSIA-II [35, 72]
19. For DTP , growth of microbes from a blood sample drawn
f r o mac a t h e t e rh u ba tl e a s t2hb e f o r em i c r o b i a lgrowth is detected in a blood sample obtained from aperipheral vein best deﬁnes CRBSIA-II [49]
20. Quantitative blood cultures and/or DTP should be per-
formed before initiating antimicrobial therapy and withthe same volume of blood per bottleA-II [50]
21. Evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend that blood cul-
tures be routinely performed after discontinuation ofantimicrobial therapy for CRBSIC-III
How should catheter-related infections generally be
managed?
22. When denoting duration of antimicrobial therapy, day 1 is
the ﬁrst day on which negative blood culture resultsare obtainedC-III [184]
23. Vancomycin is recommended for empirical therapy in
heath care settings with an elevated prevalence ofmethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA);
for institutions in which the preponderance of MRSAisolates have vancomycin minimum inhibitory concen-tration (MIC) values
12mg/mL, alternative agents, such
as daptomycin, should be usedA-II [55, 56]
24. Linezolid should not be used for empirical therapy (i.e.,
for patients suspected but not proven to have CRBSI)A-I [52]
25. Empirical coverage for gram-negative bacilli should be
based on local antimicrobial susceptibility data and theseverity of disease (e.g., a fourth-generation cephalo-sporin, carbapenem, or b-lactam/ b-lactamase combina-
tion, with or without an aminoglycoside)A-II
26. Empirical combination antibiotic coverage for multidrug-
resistant (MDR) gram-negative bacilli, such as Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa, should be used when CRBSI is
suspected in neutropenic patients, severely ill patientswith sepsis, or patients known to be colonized withsuch pathogens, until the culture and susceptibilitydata are available and de-escalation of the antibioticregimen can be doneA-II [13, 258, 259]
27. In addition to coverage for gram-positive pathogens, em-
pirical therapy for suspected CRBSI involving femoralcatheters in critically ill patients should include cover-age for gram-negative bacilli and Candida speciesA-II [178]
28. Empirical therapy for suspected catheter-related candide-
mia should be used for septic patients with any of thefollowing risk factors: total parenteral nutrition, pro-longed use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, hematologicmalignancy, receipt of bone marrow or solid-organtransplant, femoral catheterization, or colonization duetoCandida species at multiple sitesB-II [178, 200]
29. For empirical treatment of suspected catheter-related
candidemia, use an echinocandin or, in selected pa-tients, ﬂuconazoleA-II [186, 187, 194, 260]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

8Fluconazole can be used for patients without azole expo-
sure in the previous 3 months and in health care set-
tings where the risk of Candida krusei orCandida gla-
brata infection is very lowA-III [184, 260]
30. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used for catheter
salvageB-II [114, 124]
However, if antibiotic lock therapy cannot be used in this
situation, systemic antibiotics should be administeredthrough the colonized catheterC-III
31. Four to 6 weeks of antibiotics should be administered in
patients with persistent fungemia or bacteremia aftercatheter removal (i.e.,
172 h) and in patients found to
have infective endocarditis or suppurative thrombo-phlebitis and pediatric patients with osteomyelitisA-II for S. au-
reus; C-III for
other pathogens[143, 146]
Six to 8 weeks of therapy should be used for the treat-
ment of osteomyelitis in adults (ﬁgures 2 and 3) (A-II).
32. Long-term catheters should be removed from patients
with CRBSI associated with any of the following con-ditions: severe sepsis; suppurative thrombophlebitis;endocarditis; bloodstream infection that continues de-spite
172 h of antimicrobial therapy to which the in-
fecting microbes are susceptible; or infections due toS. aureus, P . aeruginosa, fungi, or mycobacteriaA-II [144, 145]
Short-term catheters should be removed from patients
with CRBSI due to gram-negative bacilli, S. aureus, en-
terococci, fungi, and mycobacteriaA-II
33. For patients with CRBSI for whom catheter salvage is at-
tempted, additional blood cultures should be obtained,and the catheter should be removed if blood cultureresults (e.g., 2 sets of blood cultures obtained on agiven day; 1 set of blood cultures is acceptable for ne-onates) remain positive when blood samples are ob-tained 72 h after the initiation of appropriate therapyB-II
34. For long-term and short-term CRBSI due to less virulent
microbes that are difﬁcult to eradicate (e.g., Bacillus
species, Micrococcus species, or Propionibacteria),
catheters should generally be removed after blood cul-ture contamination is ruled out on the basis of multiplepositive culture results, with at least 1 blood culturesample drawn from a peripheral veinB-III [202, 203, 261]
35. In uncomplicated CRBSI involving long-term catheters
due to pathogens other than S. aureus, P . aeruginosa,
Bacillus species, Micrococcus species, Propionibac-
teria, fungi, or mycobacteria, because of the limitedaccess sites in many patients who require long-termintravascular access for survival (e.g., patients under-going hemodialysis or with short-gut syndrome), treat-ment should be attempted without catheter removal,with use of both systemic and antimicrobial locktherapyB-II [114, 124]
36. After a positive blood culture result is reported that may
represent CRBSI, automated standardized treatmentadvice can be formulated to improve compliance withIDSA guidelinesB-II [57]
37. Urokinase and other thrombolytic agents are not recom-
mended as adjunctive therapy for patients with CRBSIB-I [58, 59]
38. If a catheterized patient has a single positive blood cul-
ture that grows coagulase-negative Staphylococcus
species, then additional cultures of blood samples ob-tained through the suspected catheter and from a pe-ripheral vein should be performed before the initiationof antimicrobial therapy and/or catheter removal to becertain that the patient has true bloodstream infectionand that the catheter is the likely sourceA-II [262, 263]
What are the unique aspects of treating short-term
peripheral venous catheters?
39. Peripheral intravenous catheters with associated pain, in-
duration, erythema, or exudate should be removedA-I
40. Any exudate at the insertion site should be submitted
for Gram staining, routine culture, and additional cul-ture for fungi and acid-fast organisms, as indicated,when assessing immunocompromised patientsA-IIDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

9What are the unique aspects of treating nontun-
neled central venous catheters and arterial
catheters?
41. For patients who are hospitalized in the intensive care
unit with a new onset of fever but without severe
sepsis or evidence of bloodstream infection, obtainblood samples for culture from the nontunneled CVC,the arterial catheter (if present), and percutaneously,instead of performing routine catheter removalB-II [70]
Consider culture of samples obtained from the insertion
site and catheter hubs, if available, as noted aboveA-II [33]
42. The CVC and arterial catheter, if present, should be re-
moved and cultured if the patient has unexplainedsepsis or erythema overlying the catheter insertionsite or purulence at the catheter insertion siteB-II
43. For patients with unexplained fever, if blood culture re-
sults are positive, the CVC or arterial catheter was ex-changed over a guidewire, and the catheter tip hassigniﬁcant growth, then the catheter should be re-moved and a new catheter placed in a new siteB-II
What are the unique aspects of treating long-term
CVC or implanted catheter-related infections otherthan hemodialysis catheters?
44. Patients with tunnel infection or port abscess require re-
moval of the catheter, incision and drainage if indi-cated, and 7–10 days of antibiotic therapy in the ab-sence of concomitant bacteremia or candidemia.A-II [19, 264]
45. For patients with suspected exit site infection, obtain
cultures of any drainage from the exit site and bloodculturesA-II [19]
46. Uncomplicated exit site infections (i.e., those without
systemic signs of infection, positive blood culture re-sults, or purulence) should be managed with topicalantimicrobial agents on the basis of the exit site cul-ture results (e.g., mupirocin ointment for S. aureus in-
fection and ketoconazole or lotrimin ointment for Can-
dida infectionB-III
47. If an uncomplicated exit site infection fails to resolve
with topical therapy or if it is accompanied by purulentdrainage, then systemic antibiotics should be adminis-tered on the basis of the antimicrobial susceptibility ofthe causative pathogen; the catheter should be re-moved if treatment with systemic antibiotics failsB-II [19]
48. If other vascular sites are unavailable and/or the patient
is at increased risk for bleeding diathesis in the settingof CRBSI not complicated by an exit site or tunnel in-fection, then exchange the infected catheter over aguidewireB-III [73]
In such situations, an antimicrobial-impregnated catheter
with an anti-infective intraluminal surface should beconsidered for catheter exchangeB-II [73]
What are the unique aspects of treating pediatric
patients with catheter-related infections?
49. Indications for catheter removal for children are similar
to those for adults (see recommendations 30–32), un-
less there are unusual extenuating circumstances(e.g., no alternative catheter insertion site). However,the beneﬁts of catheter removal must be weighedagainst the difﬁculty of obtaining alternate venous ac-cess for an individual patientA-II [89]
50. Children treated without catheter removal should be
closely monitored with clinical evaluation and addi-tional blood cultures; the device should be removed ifthere is clinical deterioration or persistent or recurrentCRBSIB-III [89]
51. In general, empirical antibacterial therapy for children
with CRBSI should be similar to that for adults (seerecommendations 21–23)A-II [89]
52. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used for catheter
salvageB-II [93]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

10However, if antibiotic lock therapy cannot be used in this
situation, systemic antibiotics should be administered
through the colonized catheterC-III
What are the unique aspects of managing patients
receiving hemodialysis through catheters forwhom catheter-related infection is suspected orproven?
53. Peripheral blood samples should be obtained for culture
from vessels that are not intended for future use in
creating a dialysis ﬁstula (e.g., hand veins)A-III [265]
54. When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained,
blood samples may be drawn during hemodialysisfrom bloodlines connected to the CVCB-II [265]
55. In patients with suspected CRBSI for whom blood cul-
tures have been obtained and for whom antibiotictherapy has been initiated, antibiotic therapy can bediscontinued if both sets of blood cultures have nega-tive results and no other source of infection isidentiﬁedB-II [265]
56. When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained, no
other catheter is in place from which to obtain an ad-ditional blood sample, there is no drainage from the in-sertion site available for culture, and there is no clinicalevidence for an alternate source of infection, then pos-itive results of culture performed on a blood sampleobtained from a catheter should lead to continuationof antimicrobial therapy for possible CRBSI in a symp-tomatic hemodialysis patientB-II [100]
57. The infected catheter should always be removed for pa-
tients with hemodialysis CRBSI due to S. aureus ,
Pseudomonas species, or Candida species and a tem-
porary (nontunneled catheter) should be inserted intoanother anatomical siteA-II [115]
If absolutely no alternative sites are available for catheter
insertion, then exchange the infected catheter over aguidewireB-II [265]
58. When a hemodialysis catheter is removed for CRBSI, a
long-term hemodialysis catheter can be placed onceblood cultures with negative results are obtainedB-III [265]
59. For hemodialysis CRBSI due to other pathogens (e.g.,
gram-negative bacilli other than Pseudomonas species
or coagulase-negative staphylococci), a patient can ini-tiate empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy withoutimmediate catheter removal. If the symptoms persistor if there is evidence of a metastatic infection, thecatheter should be removedB-II [265]
If the symptoms that prompted initiation of antibiotic
therapy (fever, chills, hemodynamic instability, or al-tered mental status) resolve within 2–3 days and thereis no metastatic infection, then the infected cathetercan be exchanged over a guidewire for a new, long-term hemodialysis catheterB-II [111]
60. Alternatively, for patients for whom catheter removal is
not indicated (i.e., those with resolution of symptomsand bacteremia within 2–3 days after initiation of sys-temic antibiotics and an absence of metastatic infec-tion), the catheter can be retained, and an antibioticlock can be used as adjunctive therapy after each dial-ysis session for 10–14 daysB-II [99]
61. Empirical antibiotic therapy should include vancomycin
and coverage for gram-negative bacilli, based on thelocal antibiogram (e.g., third-generation cephalosporin,carbapenem, or b-lactam/ b-lactamase combination)A-II [265]
62. Patients who receive empirical vancomycin and who are
found to have CRBSI due to methicillin-susceptible S.
aureus should be switched to cefazolinA-II [266]
63. For cefazolin, use a dosage of 20 mg/kg (actual body
weight), rounded to the nearest 500-mg increment, af-ter dialysisA-II [104]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

1164. A 4–6-week antibiotic course should be administered if
there is persistent bacteremia or fungemia (i.e., 172 h
in duration) after hemodialysis catheter removal or for
patients with endocarditis or suppurative thrombophle-bitis, and 6–8 weeks of therapy should be adminis-tered for the treatment of osteomyelitis in adults (ﬁg-ures 3 and 4)B-II [265]
65. Patients receiving dialysis who have CRBSI due to van-
comycin-resistant enterococci can be treated with ei-ther daptomycin (6 mg/kg after each dialysis session)or oral linezolid (600 mg every 12 h)B-II [168, 170]
66. It is not necessary to conﬁrm negative culture results
before guidewire exchange of a catheter for a patientwith hemodialysis-related CRBSI if the patient isasymptomaticB-III [265]
67. Surveillance blood cultures should be obtained 1 week
after completion of an antibiotic course for CRBSI ifthe catheter has been retainedB-III [99]
If the blood cultures have positive results, the catheter
should be removed and a new, long-term dialysis cath-eter should be placed after additional blood culturesare obtained that have negative resultsB-III [265]
What is antibiotic lock therapy and how is it used to
manage patients with catheter-related infection?
Antibiotic lock therapy
68. Antibiotic lock is indicated for patients with CRBSI in-
volving long-term catheters with no signs of exit siteor tunnel infection for whom catheter salvage is thegoalB-II [114, 124]
69. For CRBSI, antibiotic lock should not be used alone; in-
stead, it should be used in conjunction with systemicantimicrobial therapy, with both regimens administeredfor 7–14 daysB-II [114, 124]
70. Dwell times for antibiotic lock solutions should generally
not exceed 48 h before reinstallation of lock solution;preferably, reinstallation should take place every 24 hfor ambulatory patients with femoral catheters (B-II).However, for patients who are undergoing hemodialy-sis, the lock solution can be renewed after every dialy-sis sessionB-II [128]
However, for patients who are undergoing hemodialysis
the lock solution can be renewed after every dialysissession.B-II [128]
71. Catheter removal is recommended for CRBSI due to S.
aureus andCandida species, instead of treatment with
antibiotic lock and catheter retention, unless there areunusual extenuating circumstances (e.g., no alternativecatheter insertion site)A-II [93, 114]
72. For patients with multiple positive catheter-drawn blood
cultures that grow coagulase-negative staphylococci orgram-negative bacilli and concurrent negative periph-eral blood cultures, antibiotic lock therapy can be givenwithout systemic therapy for 10–14 daysB-III
73. For vancomycin, the concentration should be at least
1000 times higher than the MIC (e.g., 5 mg/mL) of themicroorganism involvedB-II [121]
74. At this time, there are insufﬁcient data to recommend an
ethanol lock for the treatment of CRBSIC-III [131]
Are there pathogen-speciﬁc treatment
recommendations?
Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species
75. For uncomplicated CRBSI, treat with antibiotics for 5–7
days if the catheter is removed and for 10–14 days, incombination with antibiotic lock therapy, if the catheteris retainedB-III
76. Alternatively, patients with uncomplicated CRBSI can be
observed without antibiotics if they have no intravas-cular or orthopedic hardware, the catheter is removed,and additional blood cultures (performed on samplescollected when the patient is not receiving antibiotics)are obtained after catheter withdrawal to conﬁrm theabsence of bacteremiaC-IIIDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

1277. Catheter-related bloodstream infection due to Staphylo-
coccus lugdunensis should be managed similar to rec-
ommendations below for S. aureus .B-II [132].
Staphylococcus aureus
78. Patients with S. aureus CRBSI should have the infected
catheter removed, and they should receive 4–6 weeks
of antimicrobial therapy, unless they have exceptionslisted in recommendation 80B-II [139, 144]
79. Patients who are being considered for a shorter duration
of therapy should have a transesophageal echocardio-graph (TEE) obtainedB-II [142, 150]
80. Patients can be considered for a shorter duration of anti-
microbial therapy (i.e., a minimum of 14 days of ther-apy) if the patient is not diabetic; if the patient is notimmunosuppressed (i.e., not receiving systemic ste-roids or other immunosuppressive drugs, such asthose used for transplantation, and is nonneutropenic);if the infected catheter is removed; if the patient hasno prosthetic intravascular device (e.g., pacemaker orrecently placed vascular graft); if there is no evidenceof endocarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis on TEEand ultrasound, respectively; if fever and bacteremiaresolve within 72 h after initiation of appropriate anti-microbial therapy; and if there is no evidence of meta-static infection on physical examination and sign- orsymptom-directed diagnostic testsA-II [135]
81. If a TEE is performed, it should be done at least 5–7
days after onset of bacteremia to minimize the possi-bility of false-negative resultsB-II [152]
82. Short-term catheters should be removed immediately for
patients with S. aureus CRBSIA-II [139, 144]
83. ForS. aureus CRBSI involving long-term catheters, the
catheters should be removed unless there are majorcontraindications (e.g., there is no alternative venousaccess, the patient has signiﬁcant bleeding diathesis,or quality of life issues take priority over the need forreinsertion of a new catheter at another site)A-II [139, 144]
84. In the rare circumstance that the catheter is retained for
a patient with S. aureus CRBSI involving a long-term
catheter, the patient should receive systemic and anti-biotic lock therapy for 4 weeksB-II [99, 153]
Catheter guidewire exchange should be done, if possi-
ble, and if it is done, an antimicrobial-impregnatedcatheter with an anti-infective intraluminal surfaceshould be considered for catheter exchangeB-II [73]
85. An additional TEE should be obtained for patients with
persistent fever or bloodstream infection
17 2ha f t e r
catheter withdrawal and initiation of appropriate antibi-otic therapy if the patient had an earlier TEE obtainedand it was without evidence of endocarditis and ifthere is no evidence of an undrained metastaticinfectionA-II [152]
86. Patients whose catheter tip grows S. aureus but whose
initial peripheral blood cultures have negative resultsshould receive a 5–7-day course of antibiotics andclose monitoring for signs and symptoms of ongoinginfection, including additional blood cultures, asindicatedB-II [66]
87. Transthoracic echocardiograph ﬁndings are insufﬁcient to
rule out infective endocarditisA-II [134, 152]
88. After a catheter has been removed as a result of S. au-
reus CRBSI, placement of a new catheter can proceed
when additional blood cultures show no growthB-II [144]
Enterococcus species
89. Removal of infected short-term intravascular catheters is
recommendedB-II [166, 267]
90. Removal of infected long-term catheters should be done
in cases of insertion site or pocket infection, suppura-tive thrombophlebitis, sepsis, endocarditis, persistentbacteremia, or metastatic infectionB-II [162]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

1391. Ampicillin is the drug of choice for ampicillin-susceptible
enterococci; vancomycin should be used if the patho-
gen is resistant to ampicillinA-III [164, 170]
92. The role of combination therapy (i.e., a cell wall–active
antimicrobial and an aminoglycoside) for treating enter-ococcal CRBSI without endocarditis is unresolvedC-II [165] [170]
93. A 7–14-day course of therapy is recommended for un-
complicated enterococcal CRBSI in which the long-term catheter is retained and antibiotic lock is used orwhen the short-term catheter is removedC-III [159]
94. For enterococcal CRBSI, a TEE should be done if the pa-
tient has signs and symptoms that suggest endocardi-tis (e.g., new murmur or embolic phenomena); pro-longed bacteremia or fever, despite appropriateantimicrobial therapy (e.g., bacteremia or fever
172 h
after the onset of appropriate antibiotic therapy); radio-graphic evidence of septic pulmonary emboli; or thepresence of a prosthetic valve or other endovascularforeign bodiesB-III [160]
95. Patients with enterococcal CRBSI involving a long-term
catheter for whom the catheter is retained shouldhave follow-up blood cultures and catheter removal ifpersistent bacteremia (
172 h after the initiation of ap-
propriate antibiotic therapy) is detectedB-II
96. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used in addition to sys-
temic therapy if the catheter is retainedC-II [114, 124]
97. In cases of CRBSI due to ampicillin- and vancomycin-re-
sistant enterococci, linezolid or daptomycin may beused, based on antibiotic susceptibility resultsB-II [168, 170]
Gram-negative bacilli
98. Patients with possible CRBSI should receive empirical
antibiotic therapy to cover gram-negative bacilli if theyare critically ill, if they have sepsis, if they are neutro-penic, if they have a femoral catheter in place, or ifthey have a known focus of gram-negative bacillaryinfectionA-II [178]
99. Patients who are critically ill with suspected CRBSI and
who have recent colonization or infection with anMDR gram-negative pathogen should receive 2 antimi-crobial agents of different classes with gram-negativeactivity as initial therapy; de-escalation of the initialregimen to a single appropriate antibiotic is recom-mended once culture and susceptibility results areavailableA-II [258, 268]
100. In patients with gram-negative bacillary CRBSI involving
a long-term catheter and persistent bacteremia or se-vere sepsis despite systemic and antibiotic lock ther-apy, the device should be removed, an evaluation forendovascular infection and metastatic infection shouldbe pursued, and the duration of antibiotic therapyshould be extended beyond 7–14 days on the basis ofthe ﬁndings of these studiesC-III
Candida species
101. Catheters should be removed in cases of CRBSI due to
Candida speciesA-II [188]
102. For patients with candidemia and a short-term CVC for
whom no source of candidemia is obvious, the cathe-ter should be removed and the catheter tip sent forcultureA-II [190, 193]
Alternatively, for patients with limited venous access, ex-
change the catheter over a guidewire and performcatheter culturesB-II
If the catheter is colonized with the same species of
Candida as found in a percutaneous blood culture, the
CVC should be removedA-II [190, 193]
103. Antifungal therapy is recommended for all cases of
CRBSI due to Candida species, including cases in
which clinical manifestations of infection and/or candi-demia resolve after catheter withdrawal and before ini-tiation of antifungal therapyA-II [192]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

Other gram-positive microorganisms
104. Diagnosis of CRBSI due to Corynebacterium ,Bacillus
andMicrococcus species requires at least 2 positive
results of blood cultures performed on samples ob-
tained from different sitesA-II [269]
105. For the management of these infections, catheter re-
moval is indicated for patients with a short-term CVC,and it is also indicated for patients with an infectedlong-term catheter or implanted port, unless there areno alternative intravascular access sitesB-III [202]
How should you manage suppurative
thrombophlebitis?
106. Suppurative thrombophlebitis should be suspected in pa-
tients with persistent bacteremia or fungemia (i.e., pa-tients whose blood culture results remain positive af-ter 3 days of adequate antimicrobial therapy) withoutanother source of intravascular infection (e.g.,endocarditis)A-II [205, 206, 216]
107. A diagnosis of suppurative thrombophlebitis requires the
presence of positive blood culture results plus thedemonstration of a thrombus by radiographic testing(e.g., computed tomography, ultrasonography, or othermethods)A-II [216, 270]
108. Surgical resection of the involved vein for patients with
suppurative thrombophlebitis should be limited to pa-tients with purulent superﬁcial veins or patients inwhom the infection extends beyond the vessel wall,as well as patients who experience failure of conser-vative therapy with an appropriate antimicrobialregimenA-II [208, 220, 271]
109. The role of heparin use in this setting is unresolved C-III [220]
110. Patients with suppurative thrombophlebitis due to CRBSI
should receive a minimum of 3–4 weeks of antimicro-bial therapyB-III
How are persistent bloodstream infection and infec-
tive endocarditis managed?
111. Catheter withdrawal is required in the management of
catheter-related infective endocarditisA-II
112. TEE should be done for patients with CRBSI who have
any of the following: a prosthetic heart valve, pace-
maker, or implantable deﬁbrillator; persistent bacter-emia or fungemia and/or fever
13 days after initiation
of appropriate antibiotic therapy and catheter removal,in addition to a search for metastatic foci of infection,as indicated; and any case of S. aureus CRBSI in
which duration of therapy less than 4–6 weeks is be-ing consideredA-II [134, 272, 273]
113. Unless the clinical condition of the patient dictates other-
wise, perform a TEE at least 1 week after the onsetof bacteremia or fungemia and consider repeating theTEE for patients with a high index of suspicion for in-fective endocarditis in whom the initial TEE had nega-tive ﬁndingsB-II [152, 274]
114. Assess for suppurative thrombophlebitis as noted above B-II
115. Infective endocarditis cannot be ruled out by negative
transthoracic echocardiograph ﬁndings aloneB-II [150, 272, 273]
How would you detect and manage an outbreak of
CRBSI?
116. When extrinsic contamination of infusate or catheter
ﬂush or lock solutions is suspected, public health au-
thorities should be alerted and the suspected productshould be set aside for cultureA-II [227, 230]
117. Establish a case deﬁnition for patients who are likely to
have been exposed, including a time period, risk fac-tors, and location of the patientsA-II
118. A case-control study should be used to establish risk
factors for infection and to help elucidate potentialsources of contaminationB-IIDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •15119. Establish relatedness of the suspected organisms by re-
viewing the antibiotic susceptibility patterns, followed
by molecular ﬁngerprinting, such as pulsed-ﬁeld gelelectrophoresis, polymerase chain reaction, or multilo-cus sequence typingA-II
120. Investigation of contamination involves a thorough re-
view of potential breaches in infection control prac-tices in the hospital pharmacy and at the point of de-livery of the infusate; this requires interviews withhealth care personnel and observation of practices inthe health care settingA-II
121. Cultures of potential point-source contaminants in the
environment should be performed, including intrave-nous medications administered to patientsA-II
122. During the investigation, heightened surveillance to de-
tect new cases should be institutedA-II
123. Following identiﬁcation of a source, there should be on-
going surveillance to conﬁrm eradication of the sourceof infectionA-II
NOTE. cfu, colony-forming units; DTP , differential time to positivity; IDSA, Infectious Diseases Society of America.
ference on 8 occasions to complete the work of the guideline.
The purpose of the meetings was to discuss the questions tobe addressed, make writing assignments, and discuss recom-mendations. All members of the Expert Panel participated inthe preparation and review of the draft guideline. Feedbackfrom external peer reviewers was obtained. All collaboratingorganizations were also asked to provide feedback and endorsethe guidelines. The following organizations endorsed the guide-lines: American Society of Nephrology, European Society ofClinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Pediatric Infec-tious Diseases Society, Society for Critical Care Medicine, andthe Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. The guide-line was reviewed and approved by the IDSA Standards andPractice Guidelines Committee and the Board of Directorsprior to dissemination.
Guidelines and potential conﬂicts of interest. All members
of the Expert Panel complied with the IDSA policy on potentialconﬂicts of interest, which requires disclosure of any ﬁnancialor other interest that might be construed as constituting anactual, potential, or apparent conﬂict. Members of the ExpertPanel were provided with the IDSA’s conﬂict of interest dis-closure statement and were asked to identify ties to companiesdeveloping products that might be affected by promulgationof the guideline. Information was requested regarding em-ployment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, researchfunding, expert testimony, and membership on company ad-visory committees. The Expert Panel made decisions on a case-by-case basis as to whether an individual’s role should be lim-ited as a result of a conﬂict. Potential conﬂicts of interest arelisted in the Acknowledgements section.
Revision dates. At annual intervals, the Expert Panel Chair,
the Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee liaison ad-visor, and the Chair of the Standards and Practice GuidelinesCommittee will determine the need for revisions to the guide-line on the basis of an examination of current literature. Ifnecessary, the entire Expert Panel will be reconvened to discuss
potential changes. When appropriate, the Expert Panel willrecommend revision of the guideline to the Standards and Prac-tice Guidelines Committee and the IDSA Board for review andapproval.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Each year in the United States, hospitals and clinics purchase
1150 million intravascular devices to administer intravenous
ﬂuids, medications, blood products, and parenteral nutrition
ﬂuids, to monitor hemodynamic status, and to provide he-modialysis [4]. Different types of intravascular catheters arecurrently being used (table 3), leading to a myriad of infectiouscomplications (table 4). The focus of these guidelines is on themanagement of such complications, particularly CRBSI. In theUnited States, ∼80,000 CVC-related bloodstream infections oc-
cur in intensive care units each year [5]. In addition, the risk
of bloodstream infection varies according to the intravasculardevice [6], the type of and intended use for the catheter, theinsertion site, the experience and education of the individualwho installs the catheter, the frequency with which the catheter
is accessed, the duration of catheter placement, the character-
istics of the catheterized patient, and the use of proven pre-ventative strategies [7, 8]. For the purpose of this guideline,short-term catheters are deﬁned as those devices that are insitu for
!14 days.
Most CRBSIs emanate from the insertion site, hub, or both
[9]. For long-term catheters—particularly tunneled catheters—the catheter hub is a prominent source of microbes causingbloodstream infection [10]. In order of prevalence, the 4 groupsof microbes that most commonly cause CRBSI associated withpercutaneously inserted, noncuffed catheters are as follows: co-agulase-negative staphylococci, S. aureus, Candida species, and
enteric gram-negative bacilli. For surgically implanted cathetersDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

16•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.Table 2. Infectious Diseases Society of America–US Public Health Service Grading System for
ranking recommendations in clinical guidelines.
Category, grade Deﬁnition
Strength of recommendation
A Good evidence to support a recommendation for or against use.
B Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for or against use.
C Poor evidence to support a recommendation.
Quality of EvidenceI Evidence from /H110911 properly randomized, controlled trial.
II Evidence from /H110911 well-designed clinical trial, without randomization;
from cohort or case-controlled analytic studies (preferably from 11
center); from multiple time-series; or from dramatic results from
uncontrolled experiments.
III Evidence from opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical
experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.
NOTE. Adapted and reproduced with the permission of the Minister of Public Works and Government Services
Canada [3].
and peripherally inserted CVCs, they are coagulase-negative
staphylococci, enteric gram-negative bacilli, S. aureus, and P.
aeruginosa [8].
CRBSIs independently increase hospital cost and length of
stay [11–14]. Guidelines for the prevention of these infectionshave been published [7].
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF INTRAVASCULARCATHETER-RELATED INFECTION
DIAGNOSIS: WHEN AND HOW SHOULD
CATHETER CULTURES AND BLOOD CULTURESBE DONE?
Intravenous Catheter Cultures: Recommendations
General
1. Catheter cultures should be done when a catheter is re-
moved because of suspected CRBSI; catheter cultures shouldnot be obtained routinely (A-II).
2. Qualitative broth culture of catheter tips is not recom-
mended (A-II).
3. For CVCs, culture the catheter tip, not the subcutaneous
segment (B-III).
4. For cultures of an anti-infective catheter tip, use speciﬁc
inhibitors in the culture media (A-II).
5. Growth of
115 cfu from a 5-cm segment of the catheter
tip by semiquantitative (roll-plate) culture or growth of 1102
cfu from a catheter by quantitative (sonication) broth culturereﬂects catheter colonization (A-I).
6. When catheter-related infection is suspected and there is
a catheter exit site exudate, swab the drainage to obtain samplesfor culture and Gram staining (B-III).Short-term catheters, including arterial catheters
7. For short-term catheter tip cultures, the roll plate tech-
nique is recommended for routine clinical microbiological anal-ysis (A-II).
8. For suspected pulmonary artery catheter-related infec-
tion, culture the introducer tip (A-II).
Long-term catheters
9. Semiquantitative growth of
!15 cfus/plate of the same
microbe from both the insertion site culture and catheter hubculture strongly suggests that the catheter is not the source ofa bloodstream infection (A-II).
10. If a venous access subcutaneous port is removed because
of suspected CRBSI, send the port to the microbiology labo-ratory for qualitative culture of the port reservoir contents, inaddition to the catheter tip (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Clinical ﬁndings are unreliable for establishing the diagnosis ofintravascular device–related infection because of their poor sen-sitivity and speciﬁcity. The most sensitive clinical ﬁnding, fever,has poor speciﬁcity. Inﬂammation or purulence around theinsertion site has greater speciﬁcity but poor sensitivity [4, 15].Blood cultures that are positive for S. aureus , coagulase-negative
staphylococci, or Candida species, in the absence of other iden-
tiﬁable sources of infection, should increase the suspicion forCRBSI [16–18]. Improved symptomatology within 24 h aftercatheter removal suggests but does not prove that the catheteris the source of infection [19].
Laboratory criteria for diagnosing intravascular catheter-re-
lated infections are precise, but differences in deﬁnitions andDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •17Table 3. Types of intravascular devices and comments on their use.
Type of intravascular device Comment
Peripheral venous catheter Usually inserted into the veins of the forearm or the hand; the
most commonly used short-term intravascular device
Peripheral arterial catheter For short-term use; commonly used to monitor hemodynamic
status and to determine blood gas levels of critically ill patients;
risk of bloodstream infection may approach that of CVCs
Midline catheter Peripheral catheter (size, 7.6–20.3 cm) is inserted via the antecubi-
tal fossa into the proximal basilic or cephalic veins, but it doesnot enter central veins; it is associated with lower rates of in-fection, compared with CVCs
Short-term CVC Most commonly used CVC; accounts for the majority of all cathe-
ter-related bloodstream infections
Pulmonary artery catheter Inserted through a teﬂon introducer and typically remains in place
for an average duration of only 3 days
Pressure-monitoring system Used in conjunction with arterial catheter; associated with both
epidemic and endemic nosocomial bloodstream infections
Peripherally inserted central catheter Provides an alternative to subclavian or jugular vein catheteriza-
tion; is inserted via the peripheral vein into the superior venacava, usually by way of cephalic and basilar veins; similar risk ofinfection as CVCs in patients hospitalized in intensive care units
Long-term CVC Surgically implanted CVC (e.g., Hickman, Broviac, or Groshong
catheter) with the tunneled portion exiting the skin and a dacroncuff just inside the exit site; used to provide vascular access topatients who require prolonged chemotherapy, home-infusiontherapy, or hemodialysis
Totally implantable device A subcutaneous port or reservoir with self-sealing septum is tun-
neled beneath the skin and is accessed by a needle through in-tact skin; associated with low rates of infection
NOTE. CVC, central venous catheter
methodologies among various studies have made data difﬁcult
to compare [4, 18]. When a catheter segment is submitted forculture, it is adequate to culture only the catheter tip and notthe subcutaneous portion of the catheter [20]. If a pulmonaryartery catheter is removed because of suspected infection, thehighest yield is to culture the introducer, rather than the cath-eter itself [21]. Semiquantitative (roll plate) or quantitativecatheter culture techniques (luminal ﬂushing or sonicationmethods) are the most reliable diagnostic methodologies andhave much greater speciﬁcity than qualitative broth cultures[22–25]. A recently inserted catheter (i.e., one that had beenindwelling for
!14 days) is most commonly colonized from a
skin microorganism along the external surface of the catheter.Thus, the roll-plate method has high sensitivity. Intraluminalspread of microbes from the catheter hub into the bloodstreamis increasingly important for long-term catheters (i.e., thosethat have been indwelling /H1109114 days). In some studies, the roll-
plate method was less sensitive than other methods that alsosampled the internal surface of such catheters [10, 26], butother studies have not found this to be the case [27]. Forsubcutaneous ports, culture of the material inside the port res-ervoir is more sensitive than catheter tip culture for the di-agnosis of CRBSI [28–30].
Antimicrobial coatings may lead to false-negative culture re-sults [31, 32]. For silver sulfadiazine– or chlorhexidine-coated
catheters, speciﬁc inhibitors can abrogate this effect, but this
is not the case for minocycline- or rifampin-coated catheters
[31, 32]. The speciﬁc components of the inhibitor solution to
be used when culturing silver sulfadiazine or chlorhexidine canbe found elsewhere [31].
Various methods have been used to diagnose a catheter-
related infection without catheter removal. In one method, a
moist cotton swab can be used to do a semiquantitative culture
of a 3-cm radius around the catheter insertion site, and alginateswabs can be used to sample the inner surface of each catheterhub (1 swab per hub). Swab samples are streaked on bloodagar plates. Growth of
115 cfu/plate of the same microbe from
the insertion site swab sample and hub swab sample cultures
and from a peripheral blood culture suggests CRBSI [33]. Thisapproach also has good negative predictive value for CRBSIwhen
!15 cfu/plate are detected on insertion site and hub swab
sample cultures.
Blood Cultures: Recommendations
11. Obtain blood cultures prior to initiation of antibiotic
therapy (ﬁgure 1) (A-1)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

18•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.Table 4. Commonly used clinical deﬁnitions of intravascular catheter-related infections.
Infection Deﬁnition
Catheter colonization Signiﬁcant growth of /H110911 microorganism in a quantitative or semiquantitative culture of the catheter
tip, subcutaneous catheter segment, or catheter hub
Phlebitis Induration or erythema, warmth, and pain or tenderness along the tract of a catheterized or re-
cently catheterized vein
Exit site infection
Microbiological Exudate at catheter exit site yields a microorganism with or without concomitant bloodstream
infection
Clinical Erythema, induration, and/or tenderness within 2 cm of the catheter exit site; may be associated
with other signs and symptoms of infection, such as fever or purulent drainage emerging from
the exit site, with or without concomitant bloodstream infectiona
Tunnel infection Tenderness, erythema, and/or induration 12 cm from the catheter exit site, along the subcutaneous
tract of a tunneled catheter (e.g., Hickman or Broviac catheter), with or without concomitantbloodstream infection
a
Pocket infection Infected ﬂuid in the subcutaneous pocket of a totally implanted intravascular device; often associ-
ated with tenderness, erythema, and/or induration over the pocket; spontaneous rupture anddrainage, or necrosis of the overlying skin, with or without concomitant bloodstream infection
a
Bloodstream infection
Infusate related Concordant growth of a microorganism from infusate and cultures of percutaneously obtained blood
cultures with no other identiﬁable source of infection
Catheter related Bacteremia or fungemia in a patient who has an intravascular device and 11 positive blood culture
result obtained from the peripheral vein, clinical manifestations of infection (e.g., fever, chills, and/or hypotension), and no apparent source for bloodstream infection (with the exception of thecatheter). One of the following should be present: a positive result of semiquantitative (
115 cfu
per catheter segment) or quantitative ( 1102cfu per catheter segment) catheter culture, whereby
the same organism (species) is isolated from a catheter segment and a peripheral blood culture;simultaneous quantitative cultures of blood with a ratio of
13:1 cfu/mL of blood (catheter vs. pe-
ripheral blood); differential time to positivity (growth in a culture of blood obtained through a cath-eter hub is detected by an automated blood culture system at least 2 h earlier than a culture ofsimultaneously drawn peripheral blood of equal volume). Note that this deﬁnition differs from thedeﬁnition of central line–associated bloodstream infection used for infection-control surveillanceactivities.
NOTE. Adapted in part from Pearson [18]. cfu, colony forming units.
aFor surveillance purposes, patients with positive results of blood culture would be classiﬁed as having central line–associated bloodstream
infection.
12. Where available, a phlebotomy team should draw the
blood samples for culture (A-II).
13. Skin preparation for percutaneously drawn blood sam-
ples should be carefully done with either alcohol or tincture of
iodine or alcoholic chlorhexidine ( 10.5%), rather than povi-
done-iodine; allow adequate skin contact and drying time tomitigate blood culture contamination (A-I).
14. If a blood sample is obtained through a catheter, clean
the catheter hub with either alcohol or tincture of iodine oralcoholic chlorhexidine (
10.5%) and allow adequate drying
time to mitigate blood culture contamination (A-I).
15. For suspected CRBSI, paired blood samples drawn from
the catheter and from a peripheral vein should be culturedbefore initiation of antimicrobial therapy, and the bottlesshould be appropriately marked to reﬂect the site from whichthe cultures were obtained (A-II).
16. If a blood sample for culture cannot be drawn from a
peripheral vein, it is recommended that /H110912 blood samples
should be obtained through different catheter lumens (B-III).It is unclear whether blood samples for culture should beobtained through all catheter lumens in such circumstances(C-III).
17. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of CRBSI requires that the same
organism grow from at least 1 percutaneous blood sample cul-ture and from the catheter tip (A-I) or that 2 blood samplesfor culture be obtained (1 from a catheter hub and 1 from aperipheral vein) that meet CRBSI criteria for quantitative bloodcultures or DTP (A-II). Alternatively, 2 quantitative blood cul-tures of samples obtained through 2 catheter lumens in whichthe colony count for the blood sample drawn through onelumen is at least 3-fold greater than the colony count for theblood sample obtained from the second lumen should be con-sidered to indicate possible CRBSI (B-II). In this circumstance,the interpretation of blood cultures that meet the DTP criteriais an unresolved issue (C-III).
18. For quantitative blood cultures, a colony count of mi-
crobes grown from blood obtained through the catheter hubthat is at least 3-fold greater than the colony count from bloodDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •19samples obtained from a peripheral vein best deﬁnes CRBSI
(A-II).
19. For DTP , growth of microbes from blood drawn from
a catheter hub at least 2 h before microbial growth is detectedin blood samples obtained from a peripheral vein best deﬁnesCRBSI (A-II).
20. Quantitative blood cultures and/or DTP should be done
before initiation of antimicrobial therapy and with the samevolume of blood per bottle (A-II).
21. Evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend that blood cul-
tures be routinely obtained after discontinuation of antimicro-bial therapy for CRBSI (C-III).
Evidence Summary
Blood culture general issues. Although catheter colonization
with accompanying systemic signs of infection suggests cath-eter-related infection, a deﬁnitive diagnosis of CRBSI requirespositive percutaneous blood culture results with concordantmicrobial growth from the catheter tip or catheter-drawn cul-tures that meet the above-described quantitative culture or DTPcriteria. The accuracy of all diagnostic microbiologic methodsgreatly increases with increasing pretest probability. Thus, di-agnostic tests for vascular catheter-related infection should notbe done unless there is a high index of suspicion. Overall,quantitative blood cultures are the most accurate method bywhich to diagnose CRBSI [34, 35]. No single test is clearlysuperior for short-term CRBSI diagnosis. For diagnosis ofCRBSI in patients with long-term catheters, quantitative bloodcultures are the most accurate test, but DTP also has a highdegree of accuracy. Neither method requires catheter removal.If a blood sample for culture cannot be obtained from a pe-ripheral vein, /H110912 catheter blood samples for culture should be
drawn through different catheter lumens [36].
It is important to remember that the deﬁnition of CRBSI
used in the current document, which deals with managementof infections related to intravascular devices, differs from sur-veillance deﬁnitions used to deﬁne central line–associatedbloodstream infection [37].
Blood culture contamination issues, peripheral blood sam-
ples, and paired peripheral and catheter-drawn blood samples.Contamination rates are lower if a dedicated phlebotomy teamcollects the blood samples for culture [38]. Skin preparationwith either alcohol, alcoholic chlorhexidine (
10.5%), or tinc-
ture of iodine (10%) leads to lower blood culture contami-nation rates than does the use of povidone-iodine [39, 40].Contamination rates among blood samples obtained throughnewly inserted intravenous catheters are higher than contam-ination rates among blood samples obtained from peripheralveins [41, 42]. Blood samples obtained through catheters thatare in use are associated with a higher rate of false-positiveresults, compared with cultures of percutaneous blood samples[43]. Thus, there is higher speciﬁcity and a greater positivepredictive value when blood samples are obtained from a pe-ripheral vein for culture, compared with when blood samplesare obtained through catheters for culture [44, 45]. Negativepredictive values are excellent for cultures of blood samplesobtained from either a peripheral vein or a catheter.
DTP for CVC versus peripheral blood cultures. DTP uses
continuous blood culture monitoring for growth (e.g., radio-metric methods) and compares the DTP for qualitative bloodculture samples obtained from the catheter and from a pe-ripheral vein. The greater the inoculum of microbes inoculatedinto blood culture bottles, the shorter the incubation requiredto detect microbial growth [46].
When studied among patients with cancer and patients hos-
pitalized in intensive care units who had both long-term andshort-term catheters, this method has been shown to have ac-curacy comparable to that of quantitative blood cultures, aswell as greater cost-effectiveness [35, 47–49]. Most microbi-ology laboratories do not perform quantitative blood cultures,but many laboratories are able to determine DTP . DTP maynot discriminate between CRBSI and non-CRBSI for patientswho are already receiving antibiotics [50].
Rapid diagnostic techniques. PCR to target bacterial 16S
ribosomal DNA is sensitive and speciﬁc for diagnosing catheter-related infection but is not routinely used in clinical micro-biology laboratories [51].
HOW SHOULD CATHETER-RELATED
INFECTIONS BE MANAGED IN GENERAL?
Recommendations
22. When denoting the duration of antimicrobial therapy,
day 1 is the ﬁrst day on which negative blood culture resultsare obtained (C-III).
23. Vancomycin is recommended for empirical therapy in
heath care settings with an increased prevalence of methicillin-resistant staphylococci; for institutions with a preponderanceof MRSA isolates that have vancomycin MIC values
12mg/mL,
alternative agents, such as daptomycin, should be used (A-II).
24. Linezolid should not be used for empirical therapy (i.e.,
in patients suspected but not proven to have CRBSI) (A-I).
25. Empirical coverage for gram-negative bacilli should be
based on local antimicrobial susceptibility data and the severityof disease (e.g., a fourth-generation cephalosporin, carbape-nem, or b-lactam/b -lactamase combination, with or without
an aminoglycoside) (A-II).
26. Empirical combination antibiotic coverage for MDR
gram-negative bacilli, such as P. aeruginosa , should be used
when CRBSI is suspected among neutropenic patients, severelyill patients with sepsis, or patients known to be colonized withsuch pathogens, until the culture and susceptibility data areDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

20Table 5. Intravenous antimicrobial treatment of intravenous catheter-related bloodstream infection in adults according to the speciﬁc pathogen i solated.
PathogenPreferred
antimicrobial agentExample,
dosageaAlternative
antimicrobial agent Comment
Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus aureus
Meth susceptible Penicillinase-resistant
PenbNaf or Oxa, 2 g q4h Cfaz, 2 g q8h; or Vm, 15 mg/kg
q12hPenicillinase-resistant Pen or Csps are preferred
to Vm.cFor patients receiving hemodialysis, ad-
minister Cfaz 20 mg/kg (actual weight), round
to nearest 500-mg increment, after dialysis
Meth resistanteVm Vm, 15 mg/kg q12h Dapto, 6–8 mg/kg per day, or linezo-
lid; or Vm plus (Rif or Gm); orTMP-SMZ alone (if susceptible)Strains of S. aureus with reduced susceptibility or
resistance to Vm have been reported; strainsresistant to linezolid and strains resistant toDapto have been reported
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Meth susceptible Penicillinase-resistant
PenNaf or Oxa, 2 g q4h First-generation Csp or Vm or TMP-
SMZ (if susceptible)Vm has dosing advantages over Naf and Oxa, but
the latter are preferred because of concernsabout increasing Vm resistance
Meth resistant Vm Vm, 15 mg/kg iv q12h Dapto 6 mg/kg per day, linezolid, or
Quin/DalfFor adults !40 kg, linezolid dose should be 10
mg/kg; strains resistant to linezolid have beenreported
Enterococcus faecalis/Enterococ-
cus faecium
Amp susceptible Amp or (Amp or Pen)
/H11506aminoglycosideAmp, 2 g q4h or q6h;
or Amp /H11506Gm, 1
mg/kg q8hVm Vm may have dosing advantages over Amp, but
there are concerns about Vm resistance
Amp resistant, Vm susceptible Vm /H11506aminoglycoside Vm, 15 mg/kg iv q12h
/H11506Gm, 1 mg/kg q8hLinezolid or Dapto 6 mg/kg per day Quin/Dalf is not effective against E. faecalis
Amp resistant, Vm resistant Linezolid or Dapto Linezolid, 600 mg
q12h; or Dapto 6mg/kg per dayQuin/Dalf 7.5 mg/kg q8h Susceptibility of Vm-resistant enterococci isolates
varies; Quin/Dalf is not effective against E.
faecalis
Gram-negative bacilli
d
Escherichia coli andKlebsiella
species
ESBL negative Third-generation Csp Ctri, 1–2 g per day Cipro or Atm Susceptibility of strains varies
ESBL positive Carbapenem Erta, 1 g per day; Imi,
500 mg q6h; Mero,
1 g q8h; or doripe-nem, 500 mg q8hCipro or Atm Susceptibility of strains varies
Enterobacter species and Serratia
marcescensCarbapenem Erta, 1 g per day; Imi,
500 mg q6h; Mero,1gq 8 hCefepime or Cipro Susceptibility of strains varies
Acinetobacter species Amp/Sulb or
carbapenemAmp/Sulb, 3 g q6h; or
Imi, 500 mg q6h;M e r o ,1gq 8 h… Susceptibility of strains variesDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

21Stenotrophomonas maltophilia TMP-SMZ TMP-SMZ, 3–5 mg/kg
q8hTic and Clv …
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Fourth-generation Csp
or carbapenem or
Pip and Tazo with orwithoutaminoglycosideCefepime, 2 g q8h; or
Imi, 500 mg q6h; orM e r o ,1gq 8 h ;o rPip and Tazo, 4.5 gq6h, Amik, 15 mg/kgq 2 4 ho rT o b r a5 – 7mg/kg q24h… Susceptibility of strains varies
Burkholderia cepacia TMP-SMZ or
carbapenemTMP-SMZ, 3–5 mg/kg
q8h; or Imi, 500 mgq6h; or Mero, 1 gq8h… Other species, such as B. acidovorans andB.
pickieii, may be susceptible to same antimicro-
bial agents
Fungi
Candida albicans or other Candida
speciesEchinocandin or ﬂuco-
nazole (if organism issusceptible)Caspo, 70-mg loading
dose, then 50 mgper day; micafungin,100 mg per day; ani-dulafungin, 200 mgloading dose fol-lowed by 100 mgper day; or ﬂucona-zole, 400–600 mgper dayLipid AmB preparations Echinocandin should be used to treat critically ill
patients until fungal isolate is identiﬁed
Uncommon pathogens
Corynebacterium jeikeium (group
JK)Vm Vm, 15 mg/kg q12h Linezolid (based on in vitro activity) Check susceptibilities for other corynebacteria
Chryseobacterium (Flavobacteri-
um)speciesFluoroquinolone, such
as LvfxLvfx 750 mg q24h TMP-SMZ or Imi or Mero Based on in vitro activity.
Ochrobacterium anthropi TMP-SMZ or
ﬂuoroquinoloneTMP-SMZ, 3–5 mg/kg
q8h; or Cpfx, 400mg q12hImi, Mero, Erta, or Dori plus
aminoglycoside…
Malassezia furfur AmB … Voriconazole Intravenous lipids should be discontinued; some
experts recommend removal of catheter
Mycobacterium species Susceptibility varies by
species… … Different species have wide spectra of suscepti-
bility to antimicrobials [256, 257]
NOTE. SeeS. aureus section of the text regarding important antibiotic management issues concerning linezolid. AmB, amphotericin B; Amp, ampicillin; Atm, aztreonam; Cfaz, cefazolin; cfur, cefuroxime;
Clv, clavulanate; Cpfx, ciproﬂoxacin; Csp, cephalosporin; Ctri, ceftriaxone; Czid, ceftazidime; Erta, ertapenem; Gm, gentamicin; Imi, Imipenem; iv, intravenous; Ket, ketoconazole; Lvfx, levoﬂoxacin; Mero,
meropenem; Meth, methicillin; Mez, mezlocillin; Naf, nafcillin; Oxa, oxacillin; Pen, penicillin; PenG, penicillin G; po, by mouth; Pip, piperacillin; Quin/Dalf, quinupristin/dalfopristin; Rif, rifampin; Sulb, sulbactam;Tic, ticarcillin; Tm, tobramycin; TMP-SMZ, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; Vm, vancomycin.
aInitial antibiotic dosages for adult patients with normal renal and hepatic function and no known drug interactions. Fluoroquinolones should not be used for patients !18 years of age (see the section
of the text devoted to treating pediatric infection [256, 257]).
bPen, if the strain is susceptible.
cSome clinicians will add an aminoglycoside for the ﬁrst 5 days of therapy.
dPending susceptibility results for the isolate.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

22•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.available and de-escalation of antibiotic therapy can be per-
formed (A-II).
27. In addition to coverage for gram-positive pathogens, em-
pirical therapy for suspected CRBSI involving femoral cathetersin critically ill patients should include coverage for gram-neg-ative bacilli and Candida species (A-II).
28. Empirical therapy for suspected catheter-related candi-
demia should be used for septic patients with any of the fol-lowing risk factors: total parenteral nutrition, prolonged use ofbroad-spectrum antibiotics, hematologic malignancy, receipt ofbone marrow or solid-organ transplant, femoral catheteriza-tion, or colonization due to Candida species at multiple sites
(B-II).
29. For empirical treatment of suspected catheter-related
candidemia, use an echinocandin or, for selected patients, ﬂu-conazole (A-II). Fluconazole can be used for patients withoutazole exposure in the previous 3 months and in health caresettings where the risk of C. krusei orC. glabrata infection is
very low (A-III).
30. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used for catheter sal-
vage (B-II); however, if antibiotic lock therapy cannot be usedin this situation, systemic antibiotics should be administeredthrough the colonized catheter (C-III).
31. Four to 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy should be admin-
istered to patients with persistent fungemia or bacteremia after
catheter removal (i.e., occurring
172 h after catheter removal)
(A-II for S. aureus infection; C-III for infection due to other
pathogens), to patients who are found to have infective en-docarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis, and to pediatricpatients with osteomyelitis; 6–8 weeks of therapy should beused for the treatment of osteomyelitis in adults (ﬁgures 2 and
3) (A-II).
32. Long-term catheters should be removed from patients
with CRBSI associated with any of the following conditions:
severe sepsis; suppurative thrombophlebitis; endocarditis;
bloodstream infection that continues despite
172 h of anti-
microbial therapy to which the infecting microbes are suscep-
tible; or infections due to S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, fungi, or
mycobacteria (A-II). Short-term catheters should be removedfrom patients with CRBSI due to gram-negative bacilli, S. au-
reus, enterococci, fungi, and mycobacteria (A-II).
33. For patients with CRBSI for whom catheter salvage is
attempted, additional blood cultures should be obtained, andthe catheter should be removed if blood culture results (e.g.,
2 sets of blood cultures obtained on a given day; 1 set of blood
cultures is acceptable for neonates) remain positive when bloodsamples are obtained 72 h after the initiation of appropriatetherapy (B-II).
34. For long-term and short-term CRBSI due to less virulent
microbes that are difﬁcult to eradicate (e.g., Bacillus species,
Micrococcus species, or Propionibacteria), catheters shouldgenerally be removed after blood culture contamination is
ruled out on the basis of multiple positive culture results,with at least 1 blood culture sample drawn from a peripheralvein (B-III).
35. In uncomplicated CRBSI involving long-term catheters
due to pathogens other than S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus
species, Micrococcus species, Propionibacteria, fungi, or my-
cobacteria, because of the limited access sites in many patientswho require long-term intravascular access for survival (e.g.,patients undergoing hemodialysis or with short-gut syndrome),treatment should be attempted without catheter removal, withuse of both systemic and antimicrobial lock therapy (B-II).
36. After a positive blood culture result is reported that may
represent CRBSI, automated standardized treatment advice canbe formulated to improve compliance with Infectious DiseasesSociety of America (IDSA) guidelines (B-II).
37. Urokinase and other thrombolytic agents are not rec-
ommended as adjunctive therapy for patients with CRBSI (B-I).
38. If a catheterized patient has a single positive blood cul-
ture that grows coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species, then
additional cultures of blood samples obtained through the sus-pected catheter and from a peripheral vein should be performedbefore the initiation of antimicrobial therapy and/or catheterremoval to be certain that the patient has true bloodstreaminfection and that the catheter is the likely source (A-II).
Evidence Summary
Antibiotic therapy for catheter-related infection is often initi-ated empirically. The initial choice of antibiotics will dependon the severity of the patient’s clinical disease, the risk factorsfor infection, and the likely pathogens associated with the spe-ciﬁc intravascular device (ﬁgure 1 and table 5). In the largestpublished comparative trial of CRBSI treatment involving an-timicrobial therapy and catheter removal, 149 (88%) of 169patients had a successful microbiologic outcome when evalu-ated 1–2 weeks after the end of treatment, and there was an83% microbiologic success rate among 98 cases of CRBSI duetoS. aureus [52]. Coagulase-negative staphylococci are the most
common cause of catheter-related infection. Most of thesepathogens exhibit methicillin resistance, and this should beconsidered when choosing empirical therapy for catheter-re-lated infection [53, 54]. Vancomycin is associated with a lowerclinical success rate in treating MRSA bacteremia if the MICis/H110912mg/mL [55, 56]. Standardized treatment advice can be
formulated for each CRBSI on the basis of these guidelines.When such standardized treatment advice is automatically de-livered to treating physicians, compliance with the guidelinesincreases signiﬁcantly [57].
There are no compelling data to support speciﬁc recom-
mendations for the duration of therapy for device-related in-fection. However, the Expert Panel’s recommendations are pre-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •23
Figure 4. Catheter-related blood stream infection (CRBSI) among patients who are undergoing hemodialysis (HD) with tunneled catheters. BC, blood
culture; CVC, central venous catheter; TEE, transesophageal echocardiograph.sented in ﬁgures 1–4. Management of CRBSI should be
distinguished on the basis of the removal or retention of thecatheter, and a distinction should be made between complicatedCRBSI, in which there is suppurative thrombophlebitis, en-docarditis, osteomyelitis, or possible metastatic seeding, anduncomplicated CRBSI (ﬁgures 1–4). Intravenous administra-tion of thrombolytic agents, such as urokinase, should not beused as adjunctive treatment for CRBSI [58, 59].
WHAT ARE THE UNIQUE ASPECTS
OF TREATING PATIENTS WHO HAVE SHORT -TERM PERIPHERAL VENOUS CATHETERS?
Recommendations
39. Peripheral intravenous catheters with associated pain,
induration, erythema, or exudate should be removed (A-I).
40. Any exudate at the insertion site should be submitted
for Gram staining, routine culture, and additional culture forfungi and acid-fast organisms, as indicated, when assessing im-munocompromised patients (A-II).
Evidence Summary
Phlebitis involving short-term, peripheral intravenous cathetersis often unrelated to catheter-related infection [60, 61]. Therisk of CRBSI, with or without suppurative thrombophlebitis,from such catheters is very low [6].
WHAT ARE THE UNIQUE ASPECTS
OF TREATING PATIENTS WITH NONTUNNELEDCVCS AND ARTERIAL CATHETERS?
Recommendations
41. For patients who are hospitalized in the intensive care
unit with a new onset of fever but without severe sepsis orevidence of bloodstream infection, obtain blood samples forculture from the nontunneled CVC, the arterial catheter (ifpresent), and percutaneously, instead of performing routinecatheter removal (B-II). Consider culture of samples obtainedfrom the insertion site and catheter hubs, if available, as notedabove (A-II).
42. The CVC and arterial catheter, if present, should be
removed and cultured if the patient has unexplained sepsis orerythema overlying the catheter insertion site or purulence atthe catheter insertion site (B-II).
43. For patients with unexplained fever, if blood culture re-
sults are positive, the CVC or arterial catheter was exchangedover a guidewire, and the catheter tip has signiﬁcant growth,Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

24•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.then the catheter should be removed and a new catheter placed
in a new site (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Diagnosis and management of illness among patients with anontunneled CVC or arterial catheter and unexplained feverare summarized in table 1 and ﬁgures 1 and 2. CVCs in patientswith fever and mild-to-moderate disease should not routinelybe removed, because the majority of the catheters from patientswith suspected catheter-related infection are sterile [62]. Recentstudies suggest that the risk of arterial CRBSI approaches thatassociated with short-term CVCs [63–65].
One study found that 1 in 4 patients with S. aureus colo-
nization of an intravascular catheter subsequently developed S.
aureus bacteremia if they did not receive immediate anti-staph-
ylococcal antibiotics [66]. Similarly, other studies have foundthat S. aureus and Candida catheter colonization, compared
with catheter colonization due to enterococci or gram-negativebacilli, was more likely to be associated with CRBSI and thatCRBSIs due to S. aureus and Candida species were more likely
to be associated with complications than CRBSIs due to en-terococci or gram-negative bacilli [26, 67].
The diagnostic evaluation for new onset of fever in patients
hospitalized in the intensive care unit is a daily problem forintensive care physicians [68]. New onset of fever often leadsto the removal of intravascular catheters and the reinsertion ofnew catheters over a guidewire or into another site. However,few of these patients have a catheter-related infection [33, 50,69]. For hemodynamically stable patients without documentedbloodstream infection and without a prosthetic valve, pace-maker, or recently placed vascular graft, systematic catheterremoval may not be necessary for new onset of fever. Catheterremoval only when bloodstream infection is documented orwhen there is hemodynamic instability reduces unnecessarycatheter removal [70]. Nevertheless, if a catheter is to be re-moved for suspected catheter-related infection and the patientis at high risk for mechanical complications during catheterreinsertion, a guidewire exchange of the catheter can decreasethe risk of mechanical complications [71]. The tip of the re-moved catheter should be sent for culture. If the tip has positiveculture results, this newly inserted catheter should be replaceda second time, because bacterial contamination of the newlyinserted catheter often occurs.
WHAT ARE THE UNIQUE ASPECTS
OF TREATING PATIENTS WITH LONG-TERMCVCS OR IMPLANTED CATHETER-RELATEDINFECTIONS THAT ARE NOT ASSOCIATEDWITH HEMODIALYSIS CATHETERS?
Recommendations
44. Patients with tunnel infection or port abscess requireremoval of the catheter, incision and drainage if indicated, and7–10 days of antibiotic therapy (A-II) in the absence of con-comitant bacteremia or candidemia.
45. For patients with suspected exit site infection, obtain
cultures of any drainage from the exit site and blood cultures(A-II).
46. Uncomplicated exit site infections (i.e., those without
systemic signs of infection, positive blood culture results, orpurulence) should be managed with topical antimicrobialagents on the basis of the exit site culture results (e.g., mupi-rocin ointment for S. aureus infection and ketoconazole or
lotrimin ointment for Candida infection) (B-III).
47. If an uncomplicated exit site infection fails to resolve
with topical therapy or if it is accompanied by purulent drain-age, then systemic antibiotics should be administered on thebasis of the antimicrobial susceptibility of the causative path-ogen; the catheter should be removed if treatment with systemicantibiotics fails (B-II).
48. If other vascular sites are unavailable and/or the patient
is at increased risk for bleeding diathesis in the setting of CRBSInot complicated by an exit site or tunnel infection, then ex-change the infected catheter over a guidewire (B-III). In suchsituations, an antimicrobial-impregnated catheter with an anti-infective intraluminal surface should be considered for catheterexchange (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Surgically implantable intravascular devices consist of either atunneled silicone catheter (e.g., Hickman, Broviac, or Groshongcatheters; CR Bard) or a subcutaneously implanted port res-ervoir (e.g., Port-A-Cath; Deltec). Because the removal of suchdevices is often a management challenge, it is important to besure that one is dealing with true CRBSI rather than with con-taminated blood cultures (e.g., contaminated due to coagulase-negative staphylococci), catheter colonization without concom-itant bloodstream infection, or fever from another source(ﬁgures 1 and 3). Microbiologic data suggestive of true CRBSIcaused by potential skin ﬂora rather than contamination in-clude the following: multiple blood samples with positive cul-ture results obtained from different sites; quantitative bloodcultures performed on samples drawn from a catheter withgrowth of
115 cfu/mL of blood or isolation of the same or-
ganism from a catheter culture and a percutaneous blood cul-ture, especially if a culture performed on blood drawn fromthe catheter shows growth at least 2 h earlier than a cultureperformed on blood drawn from a peripheral vein [72]. Al-though several studies suggest that catheter exchange over aguidewire can be used successfully to manage CRBSI associatedwith long-term catheters [73], most of these were small, un-controlled studies with poor deﬁnitions, and none of thesestudies used antimicrobial catheters as a replacement for theinfected catheter [73–77]. Management of CRBSI for patientsDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •25with a long-term CVC or implantable device is summarized in
tables 5 and 6 and in ﬁgure 3.
WHAT ARE THE UNIQUE ASPECTS
OF TREATING PEDIATRIC PATIENTSWITH CATHETER-RELATED INFECTION?
Recommendations
49. Indications for catheter removal for children are similar
to those for adults (see recommendations 30–32), unless thereare unusual extenuating circumstances (e.g., no alternativecatheter insertion site). However, the beneﬁts of catheter re-moval must be weighed against the difﬁculty of obtaining al-ternate venous access for an individual patient (A-II).
50. Children treated without catheter removal should be
closely monitored with clinical evaluation and additional bloodcultures; the device should be removed if there is clinical de-terioration or persistent or recurrent CRBSI (B-III).
51. In general, empirical antibacterial therapy for children
with CRBSI should be similar to that for adults (see recom-mendations 21–23) (A-II).
52. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used for catheter sal-
vage (B-II); however, if antibiotic lock therapy cannot be usedin this situation, systemic antibiotics should be administeredthrough the colonized catheter (C-III).
Evidence Summary
The pediatric population is diverse, and the probability of in-fection varies with patient risk factors, the type and locationof the device, and the nature of the infusate [78, 79]. Amongpremature infants, birth weight is inversely proportional to therisk of infection, with infants who have extremely low birthweight (1000–1500 g) having an increased risk, compared withinfants who have very low birth weight [80]. Most nosocomialbloodstream infections among pediatric patients are related tothe use of an intravascular device [81], and in critically illneonates, the incidence of CRBSI can be as high as 18 casesper 1000 catheter-days [82]. Most CRBSIs among children arecaused by coagulase-negative staphylococci (which account for34% of cases), followed by S. aureus (25%) [83]. Among ne-
onates, coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 51% ofCRBSIs, followed by Candida species, enterococci, and gram-
negative bacilli [78, 84]. Infants with short-gut syndrome, adisorder that is clinically deﬁned by malabsorption, diarrhea,steatorrhea, ﬂuid and electrolyte disturbances, and malnutri-tion, often resulting from anatomic removal of bowel duringthe newborn period due to necrotizing enterocolitis, are morelikely to have CRBSI due to gram-negative bacilli [85].
Several problems arise when the clinical and laboratory def-
initions of infection established for adults are applied to chil-dren [18, 86]. Although speciﬁc pediatric blood culture devicesare commercially available, difﬁculty in obtaining blood sam-ples and concerns about drawing a large volume of blood may
result in lower volumes of blood being submitted for culture,
which would reduce the negative predictive value of the culture.
Often, only results from blood samples obtained via the catheter
are available to guide patient management. Peripheral cultures
are not often performed when catheter cultures are obtained,because venipuncture can be difﬁcult for infants and young
children. A recent study suggests that, among pediatric oncol-
ogy patients with a double lumen CVC, catheter-related infec-
tion can be diagnosed by a /H110915-fold difference in colony count
between the 2 lumens; this method has 62% sensitivity, 93%
speciﬁcity, and 92% positive predictive value, compared with
a comparison between the colony count for 1 lumen and for
a peripheral blood sample [87]. However, validation in a pro-
spective study is needed to conﬁrm these ﬁndings. In addition,placement of catheters or changing a catheter over a guidewireis difﬁcult for young children, and catheter removal for diag-nostic purposes is often not done out of concern over losing
access (ﬁgure 1). Because of these limitations, deﬁnitive CRBSIcan often not be diagnosed in children. In these circumstances,
many physicians treat their patients as if they had presumedCRBSI.
Although indications for catheter removal among children
should follow the recommendations for adults, because of
greater vascular access difﬁculties in children, it is often nec-
essary to attempt CRBSI treatment without catheter removal.
Several studies have reported successful CRBSI managementamong children without catheter removal [88–90]. Such chil-dren should be closely monitored, and the device should beremoved in the event of clinical deterioration or recurrence ofCRBSI. In contrast, treatment of catheter-associated fungemiawithout removal of the catheter has a low success rate and isassociated with higher mortality [91, 92]. Recent reports in-volving children with Candida CRBSI found that the addition
of antifungal lock therapy led to a high cure rate without cath-eter removal, but there are insufﬁcient data to recommendroutine catheter salvage using this approach for this infectionunless there are unusual extenuating circumstances (e.g., noalternative catheter insertion site) [93–95].
Antimicrobial agents that are appropriate for infants and
children and the recommended dosages of speciﬁc agents, bypatient age and weight, are summarized in table 6. Antibioticsshould be administered through the involved catheter. In con-trast to the recommendation for adults, empirical antifungalcoverage in critically ill patients with femoral catheters is notrecommended for children. Antifungal therapy should be ini-tiated when yeast is isolated from a blood culture or when thesuspicion of fungemia is high [90, 96–98]. The selection of anappropriate antifungal agent depends on the organism that isisolated and the drug characteristics, including available pe-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

26Table 6. Antibiotic doses for pediatric patients.
Drug Intravenous dosingMaximum
daily dosage Comments
Amikacin Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 7.5 mg/kg every 18–24 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 1200–2000 g, 7.5 mg/
kg every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g, 7.5–10 mg/kg every 12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000
g, 7.5–10 mg/kg every 8–12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 12000 g, 10 mg/kg every 8 h
Infants and children: 15–22.5 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h… Some consultants recommend initial doses of 30 mg/kg/day
divided ever y8hi np a t i e n t sw h o s es e r u ml e v e l sd o c u m e n t
the need (i.e., cystic ﬁbrosis or febrile neutropenic patients).
Ampicillin Neonates: postnatal age /H110887 days and /H110882000 g: 50 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g,
75 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h; postnatal age 17 days and !1200 g, 50 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age
17 days and 1200–2000 g, 75 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h; postnatal age 17d a y sa n d 12000 g, 100 mg/kg/day di-
vided every 6 h
Infants and children: 100–200 mg/kg/day divided every 6 h12 g …
Ampicillin-sulbactam Infants aged /H110911 month: 100–150 mg ampicillin/kg/day divided every 6 h
Children: 100–200 mg ampicillin/kg/day divided every 6 h8 g of ampicillin …
Anidulafungin Children 2– 17 years of agea: 1.5 mg/kg/day 100 mg Experience in children is limited.
Caspofungin Intravenous dosing: infants and children aged 3 months–17 years: loading dose of 70 mg/m2/day on day 1 followed by
50 mg/m2/day thereafter70 mg; may increase to 70
mg/m2/day if clinical re-
sponse is inadequate…
Cefazolin Intravenous dosing: neonates, postnatal age /H110887 days: 40 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age 17 days and
/H110882000 g: 40 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age 17d a y sa n d 12000 g: 60 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h
Infants and children: 50 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h……
Cefepime Neonates /H1108814 days of age: 30 mg/kg every 12 h
Infants 114 days of ageband Children /H1108840 kg in weight: 50 mg/kg every 12 h… No recommendation available for infants 2 weeks to 2
months of age.
Ceftazidime Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 100 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 1200–2000 g,
100 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g: 100–150 mg/kg/day divided every 8–12 h;
postnatal age 17d a y sa n d ≥1200 g, 150 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h
Infants and children /H1108812 years of age: 100–150 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h6g
Cefotaxime Intravenous dosing: neonates aged 0–4 weeks and !1200 g: 100 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887d a y s
and 1200–2000 g: 100 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g: 100–150 mg/kg/day di-
vided every 8–12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000 g: 150 mg/kg/day divided every 8 h; postnatal age 17d a y s
and12000 g: 150–200 mg/kg/day divided every 6–8 h
Infants and children !50 kg: 100–200 mg/kg/day divided every 6–8 h; 112 years and /H1109150 kg: 1–2 g every 6–8 h……
Ceftriaxone Neonates: postnatal age /H110887 days, 50 mg/kg/day given every 24 h; postnatal age 17 days and /H110882000 g, 50 mg/kg/day
given every 24 h; postnatal age 17 days and 12000 g, 50–75 mg/kg/day given every 24 h
Infants and children: 50–75 mg/kg/day divided every 12–24 h… Should not be used in hyperbilirubinemic neonates.
Ciproﬂoxacin Neonates: 7–40 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h
Infants and children: 20–30 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h800 mg Experience in neonates is limited. The risks and beneﬁts of
ﬂuoroquinolones in children should be assessed prior touse.
Fluconazole Neonates aged
114 days, infants, and children: 12 mg/kg/day once daily … …
Gentamicin Neonates: premature neonates and !1000 g, 3.5 mg/kg every 24 h; 0–4 weeks and !1200 g, 2.5 mg/kg every 18–24 h;
postnatal age /H110887 days: 2.5 mg/kg every 12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000 g, 2.5 mg/kg every 8–12 h;
postnatal age 17d a y sa n d 12000 g, 2.5 mg/kg every 8 h; once daily dosing for premature neonates with normal renal
function, 3.5–4 mg/kg every 24 h; once daily dosing for term neonates with normal renal function, 3.5–5 mg/kg every24 h
Infants and children
!5 years of age: 2.5 mg/kg every 8 h; once daily dosing in patients with normal renal function,
5–7.5 mg/kg every 24 h
Children /H110915 years of age: 2–2.5 mg/kg every 8 h; once daily dosing in patients with normal renal function, 5–7.5 mg/kg
every 24 h… Some patients may require larger or more frequent doses
(e.g., every 6 h) if serum levels document the need (i.e.,cystic ﬁbrosis, patients with major burns, or febrile neutro-penic patients).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

27Imipenem-cilastatin Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 20 mg/kg every 18–24 h; postnatal age /H110887 days, and 1200–1500 g, 40 mg/
kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 11500 g, 50 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age 17
days and 1200–1500 g, 40 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h; postnatal age 17d a y sa n d 11500 g, 75 mg/kg/day divided
every 8 h
Infants !3 months of age: 100 mg/kg/day divided every 6 h
Infants /H110913 months of age and children: 60–100 mg/kg/day divided every 6 h4g …
Levoﬂoxacin Children 6 months to 5 years of age: 10 mg/kg every 12 h
Children /H110915 years of age: 10 mg/kg every 24 h with a maximum dose of 500 mg500 mg Experience in children is limited. The risks and beneﬁts of ﬂu-
oroquinolones in children should be assessed prior to use.
Linezolid Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and birthweight !1200 g: 10 mg/kg every 8–12 h (note: use every 12 h in patients !34
weeks gestation and !1 week of age); !7 days of age and birthweight /H110911200 g, 10 mg/kg every 8–12 h (note: use
every 12 h in patients !34 weeks gestation and !1 week of age); /H110917 days and birthweight /H110911200 g, 10 mg/kg
every 8 h
Infants and children !12 years of age: 10 mg/kg every 8 h
Children /H1109112 years of age and adolescents: 10 mg/kg every 12 h600 mg …
Meropenem Neonates: postnatal age 0–7 days, 20 mg/kg every 12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000 g, 20 mg/kg every 12 h;
postnatal age 17d a y sa n d 12000 g, 20 mg/kg every 8 h
Infants ≥3 months of age and children: 20 mg/kg every 8 h1g …
Micafungin Children 12 years of age: 1–4 mg/kg/day 150 mg Younger children, infants, and neonates are likely to require
higher doses, but no recommendation is currently available.
Nafcillin Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 50 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h; /H110887 days and 1200–2000 g, 50
mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h; /H110887 days of age and 12000 g, 75 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 8 h; 17
days of age and 1200–2000 g, 75 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 8 h; 17 days of age and 12000 g, 100 mg/kg/day
in divided doses every 6 h
Infants and children: 100–200 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 4–6 h12 g …
Oxacillin Neonates: 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 50 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h; postnatal age !7 days and
1200–2000 g: 50–100 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h; postnatal age !7 days and 12000 g, 75–150 mg/kg/day
in divided doses every 8 h; postnatal age /H110917 days and 1200–2000 g: 75–150 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 8 h;
postnatal age /H110917 days and 12000 g, 100–200 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 6 h
Infants and children: 150–200 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 4–6 h12 g …
Quinupristin-dalfopristin Infants and children: 7.5 mg/kg every 8 h … Experience in children is limited. Recommended dosage
based on 0.1 to 18 years of age.
Ticarcillin Neonates: postnatal age /H110887 days and /H110882000 g, 150 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and
12000 g, 225 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 8 h; postnatal age 17 days and !1200 g, 150 mg/kg/day in divided
doses every 12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000 g, 225 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 8 h; postnatal age
17d a y sa n d 12000 g, 300 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 6–8 h
Infants and children: 200–300 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 4–624 g …
Tobramycin Neonates: preterm neonates !1000 g, 3.5 mg/kg every 24 h; 0–4 weeks of age and !1200 g, 2.5 mg/kg every 18 h;
postnatal age /H110887 days and 1200–2000 g, 2.5 mg/kg every 12 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g, 2.5 mg/kg
every 12 h
Infants and children !5 years of age: 2.5 mg/kg every 8 h
Children ≥5 years of age: 2–2.5 mg/kg every 8 h… Some patients may require larger or more frequent doses
(e.g., every 6 h) if serum levels document the need (i.e.,
cystic ﬁbrosis, patients with major burns, or febrile neutro-penic patients).
TMP-SMX Infants
12 months of age and children: mild-to-moderate infections, 6–12 mg TMP/kg/day in divided doses every 12 h;
serious infection, 15–20 mg TMP/kg/day in divided doses every 6–8 h……
Vancomycin Neonates: postnatal age /H110887 days and !1200 g, 15 mg/kg/day given every 24 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 1200–2000
g, 10–15 mg/kg given every 12–18 h; postnatal age /H110887 days and 12000 g, 10–15 mg/kg given every 8–12 h; postna-
tal age 17d a y sa n d !1200 g, 15 mg/kg/day given every 24 h; postnatal age 17 days and 1200–2000 g, 10–15 mg/kg
given every 8–12 h; postnatal age 17 days and 12000 g, 15–20 mg/kg given every 8 h
Infants and children: 40 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 6–8 h……
Voriconazole Children 12 years of age: 6 mg/kg every 12 h for 2 doses on day 1 (loading dose) followed by 4 mg/kg every 12 h
(note: doses as high as 8 mg/kg every 12 h have been reported……
NOTE. Intravenous dosing is given according to Pediatric Lexi-Comp Drugs Web site [279], unless otherwise indicated. Neonates are !4 weeks of age and infants are 4 weeks to 1 year of age, unless
otherwise speciﬁed. TMP-SMZ, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
aBenjamin et al. [280].
bFrom [281].Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

28•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.Table 7. Unique features of catheter-related bloodstream infec-
tion among patients who are undergoing hemodialysis.
Usually outpatient status
The ability to provide parenteral antibiotics during hemodialysis
sessions
Dialysis units are frequently at geographically remote sites and not
adjacent to a hospital
A physician is not usually presentBlood samples for culture are usually sent to a remote laboratory
with the potential for delayed incubation of blood culture bottles
Antibiotic drug levels are determined at a remote site and are not
available promptly
Peripheral venous access is often unavailable or needs to be
avoided
It is unclear if quantitative peripheral blood and catheter cultures
differ if samples are obtained during a dialysis session
Catheter removal poses logistical issues, because it may require
urgent placement of a new dialysis catheter
Peripherally inserted central venous catheter lines cause venous
stenosis that precludes future access in the ipsilateral extremity
Preference is given to antibiotics that can be administered during
hemodialysis treatments
Quantitative blood cultures and/or determining differential time to
positivity are frequently unable to be done or determined
Limited drug formulary exists in outpatient dialysis unitsPharmacy support is unavailable in outpatient dialysis unitsdiatric dosing information, toxicities, route of administration,
and formulations.
Conventional treatment for CRBSI has not been established
to be different from that previously described for adults (table6 and ﬁgures 1–4), but certain procedures may not apply toinfants and young children. For example, as noted in ﬁgures3 and 4, echocardiographic examination is not used commonlyfor small infants and children with CRBSI who do not haveother indicators of endocarditis. The optimal duration of ther-apy has not been established for treating catheter-related in-fection in children with or without catheter removal [89, 90].Therefore, recommendations regarding the duration of therapyfor pediatric patients with CRBSI should mirror adult rec-ommendations. Lastly, antibiotic lock therapy should also beused, with the recognition that dwell times may be variable,based on limited venous access and the necessity to use thecatheter.
WHAT ARE THE UNIQUE ASPECTS
OF MANAGING PATIENTS WHO ARE RECEIVINGHEMODIALYSIS THROUGH CATHETERSFOR WHOM CATHETER-RELATED INFECTIONIS SUSPECTED OR PROVEN?
Recommendations
53. Peripheral blood samples should be obtained for culture
from vessels that are not intended for future use in creating adialysis ﬁstula (e.g., hand veins) (table 7) (A-III).
54. When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained,
blood samples may be drawn during hemodialysis from blood-lines connected to the CVC (B-II).
55. In patients with suspected CRBSI for whom blood cul-
tures have been obtained and for whom antibiotic therapy hasbeen initiated, antibiotic therapy can be discontinued if bothsets of blood cultures have negative results and no other sourceof infection is identiﬁed (B-II).
56. When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained, no
other catheter is in place from which to obtain an additionalblood sample, there is no drainage from the insertion site avail-able for culture, and there is no clinical evidence for an alternatesource of infection, then positive results of culture performedon a blood sample obtained from a catheter should lead tocontinuation of antimicrobial therapy for possible CRBSI in asymptomatic hemodialysis patient (B-II).
57. The infected catheter should always be removed for pa-
tients with hemodialysis CRBSI due to S. aureus ,Pseudomonas
species, or Candida species and a temporary (nontunneled
catheter) should be inserted into another anatomical site (A-II). If absolutely no alternative sites are available for catheterinsertion, then exchange the infected catheter over a guide-wire (B-II).58. When a hemodialysis catheter is removed for CRBSI, a
long-term hemodialysis catheter can be placed once blood cul-tures with negative results are obtained (B-III).
59. For hemodialysis CRBSI due to other pathogens (e.g.,
gram-negative bacilli other than Pseudomonas species or co-
agulase-negative staphylococci), a patient can initiate empiricalintravenous antibiotic therapy without immediate catheter re-moval. If the symptoms persist or if there is evidence of ametastatic infection, the catheter should be removed (B-II). Ifthe symptoms that prompted initiation of antibiotic therapy(fever, chills, hemodynamic instability, or altered mental status)resolve within 2–3 days and there is no metastatic infection,then the infected catheter can be exchanged over a guidewirefor a new, long-term hemodialysis catheter (B-II).
60. Alternatively, for patients for whom catheter removal is
not indicated (i.e., those with resolution of symptoms and bac-teremia within 2–3 days after initiation of systemic antibioticsand an absence of metastatic infection), the catheter can beretained, and an antibiotic lock can be used as adjunctive ther-apy after each dialysis session for 10–14 days (B-II).
61. Empirical antibiotic therapy should include vancomycin
and coverage for gram-negative bacilli, based on the local an-tibiogram (e.g., third-generation cephalosporin, carbapenem,orb-lactam/ b-lactamase combination) (A-II).
62. Patients who receive empirical vancomycin and who are
found to have CRBSI due to methicillin-susceptible S. aureus
should be switched to cefazolin (A-II).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •29Table 8. Antibiotic dosing for patients who are undergoing
hemodialysis.
Empirical dosing pending culture results
Vancomycin plus empirical gram-negative rod coverage based
on local antibiogram data
OR
Vancomycin plus gentamicin
(Cefazolin may be used in place of vancomycin in units with a
low prevalence of methicillin-resistant staphylococci)
Vancomycin: 20-mg/kg loading dose infused during the last hour
of the dialysis session, and then 500 mg during the last 30
min of each subsequent dialysis session
Gentamicin (or tobramycin:) 1 mg/kg, not to exceed 100 mg af-
ter each dialysis session
C e f t a z i d i m e :1gi va f t e re a c hd i a l y s i ss e s s i o n
Cefazolin: 20 mg/kg iv after each dialysis session
ForCandida infection
An echinocandin (caspofungin 70 mg iv loading dose followed
by 50 mg iv daily; intravenous micafungin 100 mg iv daily; or
anidulafungin 200 mg iv loading dose, followed by 100 mg ivdaily); ﬂuconazole (200 mg orally daily); or amphotericin-B
NOTE. iv, intravenous.63. For cefazolin, use a dosage of 20 mg/kg (actual body
weight), rounded to the nearest 500-mg increment, after dialysis
(A-II).
64. A 4–6-week antibiotic course should be administered if
there is persistent bacteremia or fungemia (i.e., 172 h in du-
ration) after hemodialysis catheter removal or for patients withendocarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis, and 6–8 weeksof therapy should be administered for the treatment of oste-omyelitis in adults (ﬁgures 3 and 4) (B-II).
65. Patients receiving dialysis who have CRBSI due to van-
comycin-resistant enterococci can be treated with either dap-tomycin (6 mg/kg after each dialysis session) or oral linezolid(600 mg every 12 h) (B-II).
66. It is not necessary to conﬁrm negative culture results
before guidewire exchange of a catheter for a patient withhemodialysis-related CRBSI if the patient is asymptomatic(B-III).
67. Surveillance blood cultures should be obtained 1 week
after completion of an antibiotic course for CRBSI if the cath-eter has been retained (B-III). If the blood cultures have positiveresults, the catheter should be removed and a new, long-termdialysis catheter should be placed after additional blood culturesare obtained that have negative results (B-III).
Evidence Summary
It is frequently not feasible to obtain a peripheral blood samplefor culture from patients who are receiving dialysis [99]. Insome patients, the peripheral veins have been exhausted as aresult of multiple failed dialysis ﬁstulas or grafts. Moreover, itis important to avoid drawing blood from peripheral veins thatwill be used for future creation of a ﬁstula or graft, becausevenipuncture may injure the vein.
A substantial proportion of patients who receive dialysis who
have CRBSI are treated successfully in the outpatient setting.Hospitalization is only indicated for patients with severe sepsisor metastatic infection. CRBSI in patients who are undergoinghemodialysis has several unique features that may dictate dif-ferences in their management, compared with that of otherpatients (tables 7 and 8 and ﬁgure 4).
CRBSI in patients who are undergoing hemodialysis may be
caused by several different pathogens, but such cases are mostoften due to coagulase-negative staphylococci or S. aureus [99–
101]. If possible, antibiotic selection should be made on thebasis of pharmacokinetic characteristics that permit dosing aftereach dialysis session (e.g., vancomycin, ceftazidime, or cefa-zolin) [102], or antibiotics that are unaffected by dialysis (e.g.,ceftriaxone) should be used. The majority of gram-negativeorganisms causing CRBSI in patients who are undergoing he-modialysis are susceptible to aminoglycosides and third- orfourth-generation cephalosporins [99, 100], but cephalosporinsare preferred, because aminoglycosides carry a substantial riskof inducing irreversible ototoxicity [103]. Validated dosingschedules for cefazolin and vancomycin to ensure therapeuticconcentrations have been published (table 8) [104, 105].
Among patients who are undergoing hemodialysis who have
CRBSI involving long-term catheters, not only is the catheterthe source of the infection, but it is also the vascular access forproviding ongoing dialysis. The 4 potential treatment optionsfor such patients are (1) intravenous antibiotics alone, (2)prompt catheter removal with delayed placement of a new long-term catheter, (3) exchange of the infected catheter with a newone over a guidewire, or (4) use of systemic antibiotics and anantibiotic lock in the existing catheter (ﬁgure 4 and table 9)[102]. Administration of intravenous antibiotics alone is not asatisfactory approach, because bloodstream infection recurs inthe majority of patients once the course of antibiotics has beencompleted [101, 106–109]. Moreover, the risk of treatment fail-ure among patients who are undergoing hemodialysis whoseCRBSI is treated with antibiotics alone is a 5-fold higher, com-pared with the risk among patients who undergo catheter re-moval [110]. For patients whose symptoms resolve after 2–3days of intravenous antibiotic therapy and who do not haveevidence of metastatic infection, guidewire exchange of thecatheter is associated with cure rates that are comparable tothose associated with immediate removal and delayed place-ment of a new catheter [74–76, 111, 112]. Patients with he-modialysis-associated CRBSI due to gram-negative pathogensor CRBSI due to coagulase-negative staphylococci may havethe catheter retained and be treated with adjunctive antibioticlock therapy for 3 weeks, or they may have the catheter ex-changed over a guidewire and then receive the same antibioticcourse (ﬁgure 4).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

30•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.Table 9. Final concentrations of antibiotic lock solu-
tions used for the treatment of catheter-related blood-stream infection.
Antibiotic and dosageHeparin or
saline, IU/mL Reference(s)
Vancomycin, 2.5 mg/mL 2500 or 5000 [100, 275]
Vancomycin, 2.0 mg/mL 10 [275]
Vancomycin, 5.0 mg/mLa0 or 5000 [276, 277]
Ceftazidime, 0.5 mg/mL 100 [123]
Cefazolin, 5.0 mg/mL 2500 or 5000 [100, 277]Ciproﬂoxacin, 0.2 mg/mL
b5000 [130]
Gentamicin, 1.0 mg/mL 2500 [100]
Ampicillin, 10.0 mg/mL 10 or 5000 [275]
Ethanol, 70%c0 [131]
NOTE. These antibiotic lock solutions will not precipitate at the
given concentrations. Cefazolin is the preferred agent for treatment
of methicillin-susceptible staphylococci, and vancomycin is the pre-ferred agent for treatment of methicillin-resistant staphylococci. Cef-tazidime, gentamicin, or ciproﬂoxacin can be used for treatment ofgram-negative microorganisms. Ampicillin is the preferred agent forinfections due to ampicillin-sensitive Enterococcus species, and van-
comycin is the preferred agent for treatment of ampicillin-resistantenterococci other than vancomycin-resistant enterococci. The useof an ethanol lock can be considered for the treatment of a mixedgram-positive and gram-negative infection. NA, not applicable.
aVancomycin at 5 mg/mL is more efﬁcacious than at 1 mg/mL in
eradicating staphylococci embedded within bioﬁlm [276]. A precip-itate appears when mixing a 10 mg/mL of vancomycin with 10,000IU/mL of heparin; however, by agitating the solution for ∼10 s, the
precipitation resolves and the solution remains precipitate-free for7 2ha t3 7 /H11543C [277]. The lock solution in 2500 IU/mL heparin can be
made as follows: using vials containing 50 mg/mL of vancomycin inwater, remove 2 mL and dilute in 8 mL 0.9% NaCl, resulting in 10mg/mL of vancomycin. Place 1 mL of 5000 IU/mL heparin in a glasstest tube and mix with 1 mL of the 10-mg/mL vancomycin solution(B. J. Rijnders and R. Mathot, personal communication).
bThe maximum concentration of ciproﬂoxacin is limited because
of precipitation at higher concentrations.
cAn in-vitro study demonstrated the compatibility of ethanol 70%
and silicone or polyetherurethane catheters [278].
For antibiotic lock therapy, the antibiotic is combined with
heparin and instilled into each catheter lumen at the end of
each dialysis session (table 9) [99, 113, 114]. The success rateis 87%–100% for infection due to gram-negative pathogensand 75%– 84% for infection due to Staphylococcus epidermidis ,
but it is only 40%–55% for hemodialysis-associated CRBSI duetoS. aureus [100, 114, 115].
WHAT IS ANTIBIOTIC LOCK THERAPYAND HOW IS IT USED TO TREAT PATIENTSWITH CATHETER-RELATED INFECTION?
Recommendations
68. Antibiotic lock is indicated for patients with CRBSI in-
volving long-term catheters with no signs of exit site or tunnelinfection for whom catheter salvage is the goal (B-II).
69. For CRBSI, antibiotic lock should not be used alone;
instead, it should be used in conjunction with systemic anti-microbial therapy, with both regimens administered for 7–14days (B-II).
70. Dwell times for antibiotic lock solutions should generally
not exceed 48 h before reinstallation of lock solution; preferably,reinstallation should take place every 24 h for ambulatory pa-tients with femoral catheters (B-II). However, for patients whoare undergoing hemodialysis, the lock solution can be renewedafter every dialysis session (B-II).
71. Catheter removal is recommended for CRBSI due to S.
aureus andCandida species, instead of treatment with antibiotic
lock and catheter retention, unless there are unusual extenu-ating circumstances (e.g., no alternative catheter insertion site)(A-II).
72. For patients with multiple positive catheter-drawn blood
cultures that grow coagulase-negative staphylococci or gram-negative bacilli and concurrent negative peripheral blood cul-tures, antibiotic lock therapy can be given without systemictherapy for 10–14 days (B-III).
73. For vancomycin, the concentration should be at least
1000 times higher than the MIC (e.g., 5 mg/mL) of the mi-croorganism involved (B-II).
74. At this time, there are insufﬁcient data to recommend
an ethanol lock for the treatment of CRBSI (C-III).
Evidence Summary
Antibiotic lock therapy for CRBSI is used in conjunction withsystemic antibiotic therapy and involves installing a high con-centration of an antibiotic to which the causative microbe issusceptible in the catheter lumen. In 14 open trials of CRBSIinvolving long-term catheters with catheter retention and ad-ministration of standard parenteral therapy without the ad-junctive use of antibiotic lock therapy, the mean success ratewas 67%. The likelihood of success varies with the site of in-fection (e.g., tunnel or pocket infection are unresponsive tosalvage) and with the microbe causing the infection (e.g., co-agulase-negative staphylococci are likely to respond; S. aureus
is not). Recurrent bacteremia after parenteral therapy is morelikely to occur if that therapy is administered through a retainedcatheter than if the catheter is removed [116]. This likely reﬂectsthe inability of most antibiotics to achieve therapeutic concen-trations needed to kill microbes growing in a bioﬁlm [117–122]. Antibiotic concentrations must be 100 to 1000 timesgreater to kill sessile bacteria within a bioﬁlm than to kill plank-tonic bacteria [117–122]. Because the majority of infectionsinvolving long-term catheters or totally implanted catheters areintraluminal, eradication of such infections is attempted byﬁlling the catheter lumen with supratherapeutic concentrationsof antibiotics and leaving them indwelling for hours or days,thereby creating an antibiotic lock. In 21 open trials of anti-biotic lock therapy for CRBSI involving long-term catheters,with or without concomitant parenteral therapy, catheter sal-vage without relapse occurred in 77% of episodes. Two con-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •31trolled clinical trials of the use of antibiotic lock therapy to-
gether included only 92 patients, and treatment was successful
in 58% of the control subjects and 75% of the patients treated
with an antibiotic lock [123, 124]. Compared with bacterial
infection, Candida CRBSI is more difﬁcult to eradicate with
antibiotic lock therapy [93, 125–127]. In the largest published
series on the use of antibiotic lock for CRBSI due to S. aureus ,
treatment failure was observed in one-half of the cases [114].Antibiotic lock solutions contain the desired antimicrobial con-
centration (table 9), and they are usually mixed with 50–100
units of heparin or normal saline in sufﬁcient volume to ﬁllthe catheter lumen (usually 2–5 mL). Rapidly decreasing an-
tibiotic concentrations may occur over time in the distal lumen
of catheters instilled with an antibiotic lock, especially among
ambulatory patients with femoral catheters [128]. Thus, tomaintain a concentration of vancomycin that is
11000 times
the MIC90of staphylococci during the entire dwell time, a con-
centration of 5 mg/mL is preferred, and the antibiotic lock ﬂuid
should be changed at least every 48 h.
Although the duration of antibiotic lock therapy has varied
substantially among different studies (3–30 days), most studies
have used a 2-week duration. Vancomycin, cefazolin, and cef-
tazidime remain stable in heparin solutions at 25 /H11034Ca n d3 7 /H11034C
for several days [129]. Not all antibiotic-heparin combinationscan be used, because precipitation occurs when some antibiotics
are mixed with heparin, especially with increasing antibiotic
concentrations [130]. Table 9 lists antibiotic lock solutions thatcan be used without the risk of precipitation.
The use of an antibiotic lock does not obviate the need for
systemic antimicrobial therapy. However, when blood cultureshave become negative and signs of sepsis have resolved, systemicantimicrobial therapy can be given orally in some patients. Thecombination of an orally administered, well-absorbed antibiotic(e.g., a ﬂuoroquinolone or linezolid) and an antibiotic lock thatcan be left in place for 24–48 h may be more practical in somecases of outpatient management of CRBSI with coagulase-neg-ative staphylococci [129].
Catheters that are in place for
!2 weeks are most often in-
fected extraluminally, and patients with catheters in place forlonger periods may also have evidence of extraluminal infection[10]. Antibiotic lock therapy is unlikely to have any impact onextraluminal infection.
Other antimicrobial locks are being evaluated for the treat-
ment of CRBSI. One pediatric CRBSI study had a high successrate using a 70% ethanol antimicrobial lock [131].
On occasion, symptomatic patients with catheters have mul-
tiple catheter-drawn blood cultures that are positive for co-agulase-negative staphylococci or, more rarely, gram-negativebacilli, but also have concurrent percutaneous blood cultureswith negative results. Such patients can be considered to havean intraluminally colonized catheter. If these colonized cath-
eters are left in place, patients may go on to develop a trueCRBSI. Therefore, if such catheters cannot be removed, anti-biotic lock therapy without systemic therapy can be giventhrough the retained catheter.
ARE THERE PATHOGEN-SPECIFIC TREATMENT
RECOMMENDATIONS?
Coagulase-Negative Staphylococcus Species
Recommendations
75. For uncomplicated CRBSI, treat with antibiotics for 5–
7 days if the catheter is removed and for 10–14 days, in com-bination with antibiotic lock therapy, if the catheter is retained(B-III).
76. Alternatively, patients with uncomplicated CRBSI can be
observed without antibiotics if they have no intravascular ororthopedic hardware, the catheter is removed, and additionalblood cultures (performed on samples collected when the pa-tient is not receiving antibiotics) are obtained after catheterwithdrawal to conﬁrm the absence of bacteremia (C-III).
77. CRBSI due to Staphylococcus lugdunensis should be man-
aged in a manner similar to CRBSI due to S. aureus (B-II).
Evidence summary. Coagulase-negative staphylococci are the
most common cause of catheter-related infection. Most patientshave a benign clinical course; rarely, patients develop sepsiswith a poor outcome. For example, S. lugdunensis is an un-
common cause of catheter-related infection; however, it cancause endocarditis and metastatic infections similar to thosecaused by S. aureus [132].
The interpretation of blood cultures positive for coagulase-
negative staphylococci remains problematic, because they arethe most common contaminant and, at the same time, theyare the most common cause of CRBSI. A high proportion ofpositive blood cultures performed on samples drawn from mul-tiple sites remains the best indication for true CRBSI due tocoagulase-negative staphylococci [17, 133].
No randomized trials have evaluated the treatment of co-
agulase-negative staphylococcal CRBSI. Such infections may
resolve with removal of the catheter without antibiotic therapy,and some experts recommend that no antibiotic therapy be
administered to patients without endovascular hardware unless
fever and/or bacteremia persist after catheter withdrawal. Otherexperts recommend that such infections be treated with anti-biotics. Speciﬁc management strategies for coagulase-negativestaphylococcal infection associated with different catheters anddevices are summarized in table 5 and ﬁgures 2–4.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

32•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.S. aureus
Recommendations
78. Patients with S. aureus CRBSI should have the infected
catheter removed, and they should receive 4–6 weeks of anti-
microbial therapy (B-II), unless they have exceptions listed inrecommendation 80.
79. Patients who are being considered for a shorter duration
of therapy should have a transesophageal echocardiograph(TEE) obtained (B-II).
80. Patients can be considered for a shorter duration of
antimicrobial therapy (i.e., a minimum of 14 days of therapy)if the patient is not diabetic; if the patient is not immunosup-pressed (i.e., not receiving systemic steroids or other immu-nosuppressive drugs, such as those used for transplantation,and is nonneutropenic); if the infected catheter is removed; ifthe patient has no prosthetic intravascular device (e.g., pace-maker or recently placed vascular graft); if there is no evidenceof endocarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis on TEE andultrasound, respectively; if fever and bacteremia resolve with-in 72 h after initiation of appropriate antimicrobial therapy;and if there is no evidence of metastatic infection on physicalexamination and sign- or symptom-directed diagnostic tests(A-II).
81. If a TEE is performed, it should be done at least 5–7
days after onset of bacteremia to minimize the possibility offalse-negative results (B-II).
82. Short-term catheters should be removed immediately for
patients with S. aureus CRBSI (A-II).
83. For S. aureus CRBSI involving long-term catheters, the
catheters should be removed unless there are major contrain-dications (e.g., there is no alternative venous access, the patienthas signiﬁcant bleeding diathesis, or quality of life issues takepriority over the need for reinsertion of a new catheter at an-other site) (A-II).
84. In the rare circumstance that the catheter is retained for
a patient with S. aureus CRBSI involving a long-term catheter,
the patient should receive systemic and antibiotic lock therapyfor 4 weeks (B-II). Catheter guidewire exchange should be done,if possible, and if it is done, an antimicrobial-impregnated cath-eter with an anti-infective intraluminal surface should be con-sidered for catheter exchange (B-II).
85. An additional TEE should be obtained for patients with
persistent fever or bloodstream infection
172 h after catheter
withdrawal and initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy ifthe patient had an earlier TEE obtained and it was withoutevidence of endocarditis and if there is no evidence of an un-drained metastatic infection (A-II).
86. Patients whose catheter tip grows S. aureus but whose
initial peripheral blood cultures have negative results shouldreceive a 5–7-day course of antibiotics and close monitoringfor signs and symptoms of ongoing infection, including ad-ditional blood cultures, as indicated (B-II).
87. Transthoracic echocardiograph ﬁndings are insufﬁcient
to rule out infective endocarditis (A-II).
88. After a catheter has been removed as a result of S. aureus
CRBSI, placement of a new catheter can proceed when addi-tional blood cultures show no growth (B-II).
Evidence summary. There are no data from randomized
trials with adequate sample size to determine the optimal du-ration for the treatment of S. aureus CRBSI. Traditionally, S.
aureus bacteremia has been treated with a 4-week course of
therapy because of concern about the risk of infective endo-carditis [134, 135]. However, several studies have suggested thatthe risk of infective endocarditis or other deep tissue infectionrelated to S. aureus bacteremia may be sufﬁciently low among
selected patients with uncomplicated CRBSI to recommend ashorter course of therapy (i.e., a minimum of 14 days of ther-apy) [136–140]. Identifying patients without risk factors forhematogenous complications and pursing an aggressive eval-uation which may include TEE is important before proceedingto short-course therapy [141].
Many patients (25%–30%) with S. aureus bacteremia will
have hematogenous complications, including cardiac or mus-culoskeletal involvement [142–146]. Clinical identiﬁers can behelpful in determining which patients with S. aureus bacteremia
have a complicated infection [143, 144, 146]. One of the mostconsistent predictors of hematogenous complications is positiveblood culture results 72 h after initiation of appropriate anti-microbial therapy and catheter removal [143–146]. Additionalpredictors of hematogenous complications include commu-nity-acquired infection and skin changes consistent with septicemboli [143, 144]. Failure or delay in removing the catheterincreases the risk for hematogenous complications [144]. Inaddition, removal of vascular catheters infected with S. aureus
has been associated with a more rapid response to therapy and/or a higher cure rate, compared with catheter retention [139,144, 147, 148].
Patients with S. aureus CRBSI have a signiﬁcantly higher risk
of hematogenous complications if they have a retained foreignbody, if they are hemodialysis-dependent, if they have AIDS,or if they are diabetic or receiving immunosuppressive medi-cations [144]. For this reason, a longer course of therapy isprudent for immunosuppressed patients with S. aureus CRBSI.
Many cases of infective endocarditis are not suspected clin-
ically and are therefore not detected [149]. Studies using TEEto identify infective endocarditis among patients with S. aureus
bacteremia have shown high rates of valvular vegetations (25%–32%) [142, 150, 151]. TEE is superior to transthoracic echo-cardiography in detecting valvular vegetations [134]. Addition-ally, TEE is most sensitive when performed 5–7 days after theonset of bacteremia [152].Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •33A combination of antibiotic lock therapy and systemic ther-
apy has been used to salvage infected ports and long-term (e.g.,
hemodialysis) catheters for some patients with S. aureus CRBSI
[99, 107, 153]. Although some catheters without evidence ofexit site infection or tunnel infection may be salvaged, mostpatients with S. aureus CRBSIs eventually experience relapse
and require removal of the catheter [99, 107].
Patients with catheters that are colonized with S. aureus who
are not bacteremic are at risk for subsequent S. aureus bacter-
emia [66, 154], and administering antistaphylococcal therapywithin 24 h after removal of the catheter may reduce the like-lihood that the patient will develop bacteremia.
In the largest randomized, published study assessing treat-
ment of CRBSI in adults, a group of patients who receivedlinezolid was compared with a control group that received non–weight-based vancomycin (for MRSA infection) or oxacillin (2g every 6 h) or dicloxacillin (500 mg orally every 6 h); forsuspected gram-negative bacteremia, aztreonam or amikacinwas recommended [52]. The rate of successful microbiologicoutcome at test of cure for patients with methicillin-susceptibleS. aureus CRBSI was 82% for the linezolid group and 83% for
the control group (95% conﬁdence interval [CI], /H1100216 to 14);
for patients with MRSA CRBSI, it was 81% for the linezolidgroup and 86% for the control group (95% CI, /H1100226 to 16). A
successful clinical outcome at test of cure for patients withmethicillin-susceptible S. aureus CRBSI was achieved in 67%
in the linezolid group and 67% in the control group (95% CI,/H1100219 to 19); for patients with MRSA CRBSI, it was 79% in the
linezolid group and 76% in the control group (95% CI, /H1100221
to 27). Kaplan-Meier survival curves for intention-to-treat pop-ulations found that there was no statistically signiﬁcant differ-ence between the 2 treatment groups among patients with S.
aureus bacteremia (hazard ratio [HR], 0.70; 95% CI, 0.34–1.44)
or among patients who had gram-negative bacteremia (HR,1.94; 95% CI, 0.78–4.81). However, patients without bacteremiaat baseline were less likely to survive in the linezolid groupthan in the control group (HR, 2.20; 95% CI, 1.07–4.50). Thus,linezolid has not been recommended for empirical therapy inthis guideline (i.e., for patients in whom CRBSI is suspectedbut not conﬁrmed). Speciﬁc management strategies for S. au-
reus CRBSI are summarized in table 5 and ﬁgures 2–4.
Enterococcus Species
Recommendations
89. Removal of infected short-term intravascular catheters
is recommended (B-II).
90. Removal of infected long-term catheters should be done
in cases of insertion site or pocket infection, suppurative throm-bophlebitis, sepsis, endocarditis, persistent bacteremia, or met-astatic infection (B-II).91. Ampicillin is the drug of choice for ampicillin-suscep-
tible enterococci; vancomycin should be used if the pathogenis resistant to ampicillin (A-III).
92. The role of combination therapy (i.e., a cell wall–active
antimicrobial and an aminoglycoside) for treating enterococcalCRBSI without endocarditis is unresolved (C-II) .
93. A 7–14-day course of therapy is recommended for un-
complicated enterococcal CRBSI in which the long-term cath-eter is retained and antibiotic lock is used or when the short-term catheter is removed (C-III).
94. For enterococcal CRBSI, a TEE should be done if the
patient has signs and symptoms that suggest endocarditis (e.g.,new murmur or embolic phenomena); prolonged bacteremiaor fever, despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy (e.g., bac-teremia or fever
172 h after the onset of appropriate antibiotic
therapy); radiographic evidence of septic pulmonary emboli;or the presence of a prosthetic valve or other endovascularforeign bodies (B-III).
95. Patients with enterococcal CRBSI involving a long-term
catheter for whom the catheter is retained should have follow-up blood cultures and catheter removal if persistent bacteremia(
172 h after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy) is
detected (B-II).
96. Antibiotic lock therapy should be used in addition to
systemic therapy if the catheter is retained (C-II) .
97. In cases of CRBSI due to ampicillin- and vancomycin-
resistant enterococci, linezolid or daptomycin may be used,based on antibiotic susceptibility results (B-II).
Evidence summary. Enterococci account for 10% of all
nosocomial bloodstream infections [155, 156], many of whichare caused by intravascular catheters. Sixty percent of Entero-
coccus faecium and 2% of Enterococcus faecalis nosocomial
bloodstream infections are resistant to vancomycin [156]. An-timicrobial resistance to newer agents, such as linezolid, hasbeen reported [157, 158].
The risk of endocarditis as a complication of enterococcal
CRBSI is relatively low. In a multicenter study involving
1205
cases of CRBSI due to vancomycin-resistant enterococci, only1.5% had deﬁnitive evidence of endocarditis [159]. However,signs and symptoms of endocarditis, persistent bacteremia, orenterococcal bacteremia in the presence of a prosthetic valvewarrant further evaluation with TEE [160, 161]. Enterococcalbacteremia that persists for
14 days is independently associated
with mortality [162, 163].
There are no data from randomized trials with adequate
statistical power to determine the role of combination anti-microbial therapy or the optimal treatment duration for en-terococcal CRBSI. Several retrospective cohort studies foundno statistically signiﬁcant differences in outcomes among pa-tients with uncomplicated enterococcal bloodstream infectiontreated with combination therapy versus monotherapy [164,Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

34•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.165]. However, one large series found that combination therapy
with gentamicin and ampicillin was more effective than mono-therapy when the catheter was retained in cases of enterococcalCRBSI [166]. The combination of ampicillin and high-doseceftriaxone was used successfully in a nonrandomized study ofenterococcal endocarditis for patients in which use of an ami-noglycoside was precluded because of either antimicrobial re-sistance or nephrotoxicity [167].
An open-label clinical trial among solid-organ transplant re-
cipients reported a 63% success rate in treating vancomycin-resistant enterococci bloodstream infections with linezolid[168]. Quinupristin-dalfopristin has been reported for use intreating bloodstream infections due to E. faecium, with an over-
all clinical response rate of 69% in the small subset of patientswith CRBSI [169]. An open-label study of neutropenic patientsfound a 44% cure rate in an intention-to-treat analysis of en-terococcal bacteremia treated with daptomycin [170]. In a ret-rospective cohort study, chloramphenicol treatment of van-comycin-resistant enterococci bloodstream infections had aclinical response rate of 61% [171]. Speciﬁc management strat-egies for enterococcal CRBSI are summarized in table 5 andﬁgures 2–4.
Gram-Negative Bacilli
Recommendations
98. Patients with possible CRBSI should receive empirical
antibiotic therapy to cover gram-negative bacilli if they arecritically ill, if they have sepsis, if they are neutropenic, if theyhave a femoral catheter in place, or if they have a known focusof gram-negative bacillary infection (A-II).
99. Patients who are critically ill with suspected CRBSI and
who have recent colonization or infection with an MDR gram-negative pathogen should receive 2 antimicrobial agents of dif-ferent classes with gram-negative activity as initial therapy (A-II). De-escalation of the initial regimen to a single appropriateantibiotic is recommended once culture and susceptibility re-sults are available (A-II).
100. In patients with gram-negative bacillary CRBSI involv-
ing a long-term catheter and persistent bacteremia or severesepsis despite systemic and antibiotic lock therapy, the deviceshould be removed, an evaluation for endovascular infectionand metastatic infection should be pursued, and the durationof antibiotic therapy should be extended beyond 7–14 days onthe basis of the ﬁndings of these studies (C-III).
Evidence summary. During the past 2 decades, rates of
gram-negative bacillary intravascular device infection and sec-ondary bacteremia among adults have decreased, supplantedby infections due to coagulase-negative staphylococci, S. aureus(often MRSA), and Candida species [172]. The incidence of
infections due to antibiotic-resistant gram-negative pathogens
has increased over the past decade [86, 173], and patients withCRBSI due to MDR gram-negative pathogens are at greater riskfor inappropriate initial antibiotic therapy, which results in in-creased morbidity and mortality [172–177]. Risk factors for
infection due to MDR gram-negative bacilli include being crit-ically ill, being neutropenic, having received prior antibiotic
therapy, and having a femoral catheter [172, 178–180].
Over the past decade, the incidence of gram-negative bacilli
resistant to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins has
increased [15, 86, 173]. MDR Klebsiella pneumoniae and Esch-
erichia coli expressing extended-spectrum b-lactamases have
been associated with poor clinical outcomes when treated with
cephalosporins or piperacillin-tazobactam versus carbapenems,even when the organisms appear to be susceptible in vitro [173,177]. In addition, there is increasing concern over the evolutionof MDR gram-negative bacilli having carbapenemases that con-
fer resistance to carbapenems, and many of these enzymes are
active against cephalosporins [173]. No randomized, controlledtrials have evaluated various treatments for gram-negative ba-
cilli that produce these b-lactamases or carbapenemases and
require therapy with polymyxin (colistin) or an aminoglycoside[181]. Treatment failure among patients with Enterobacter bac-
teremia who are administered cephalosporins has also been
observed [172].
Most of the recommendations for the management of CRBSI
due to MDR gram-negative bacilli have been limited by small
numbers of cases derived from outbreaks or small clusters of
infections, concerns over the accuracy and interpretation of invitro susceptibility data, and confounding by concurrent useof combinations of antibiotics. When culture and susceptibilitydata are available, the initial antibiotic regimen can be adjusted
to a single agent for the remainder of the therapeutic course,
usually for 7–14 days [182]. Recommendations and guidelinesfor the management of sepsis have been recently published[176]. Recommendations for antimicrobial therapy for speciﬁcgram-negative pathogens are shown in table 5.
Several studies have advocated the removal of an infected
catheter for patients with CRBSI due to MDR gram-negativebacilli that have a propensity for bioﬁlm production, such asAcinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas species, and Stenotro-
phomonas maltophilia [172, 179, 180, 183]. However, these
studies are limited by small numbers of patients and lack dataon the efﬁcacy of combination therapy with an antibiotic lockand systemic antibiotics. Recent studies in which antibiotic lockand systemic antibiotics were used to treat gram-negative rodCRBSI have found high success rates [99, 114]. Speciﬁc man-
agement strategies for gram-negative bacillary CRBSI are sum-marized in table 5 and ﬁgures 2–4.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •35Candida Species
Recommendations
101. Catheters should be removed in cases of CRBSI due to
Candida species (A-II).
102. For patients with candidemia and a short-term CVC
for whom no source of candidemia is obvious, the catheter
should be removed and the catheter tip sent for culture (A-II).Alternatively, for patients with limited venous access, exchangethe catheter over a guidewire and perform catheter cultures (B-II). If the catheter is colonized with the same species of Candida
as found in a percutaneous blood culture, the CVC should beremoved (A-II).
103. Antifungal therapy is recommended for all cases of
CRBSI due to Candida species, including cases in which clinical
manifestations of infection and/or candidemia resolve aftercatheter withdrawal and before initiation of antifungal therapy(A-II).
Evidence summary. Fluconazole administered at a dosage
of 400 mg daily for 14 days after the ﬁrst negative blood cultureresult is obtained is equivalent to amphotericin B in the treat-ment of candidemia caused by Candida albicans and azole-
susceptible strains [184]. For Candida species with decreased
susceptibility to azoles (e.g., C. glabrata and C. krusei), echino-
candins (caspofungin administered with a 70-mg intravenousloading dose, followed by 50 mg daily administered intrave-nously; micafungin at a dosage of 100 mg daily administeredintravenously or anidulafungin with a 200-mg intravenousloading dose followed by 100 mg daily administered intrave-nously) or lipid formulations of amphotericin B (ambisome oramphotericin B lipid complex) administered intravenously ata dosage of 3–5 mg/kg daily are highly effective [185–187].Conventional amphotericin B therapy is also effective but isassociated with more adverse effects.
The impact of CVC removal on the outcome of candidemia
has been evaluated in 6 prospective studies [188–193]. All 6prospective studies showed that CVC retention worsened out-come [188–193].
There are limited clinical data to suggest that antifungal lock
therapy with amphotericin B may result in catheter salvage forpatients with candidemia [93, 127]. Echinocandins [194], lipidformulations of amphotericin B [194, 195], or ethanol-basedlock solutions [196, 197] eradicate bioﬁlm-containing Candida
in vitro, but catheter retention in combination with antifungallock therapy is still investigational at the present time.
IfCandida is grown from blood samples obtained from a
patient with a long-term catheter or implantable port, the de-cision regarding catheter removal should be based on predictorsof a catheter-related candidemia versus another source of in-fection (e.g., the gastrointestinal tract). Predictors of CRBSIinvolving long-term catheters include the following: a
13:1
quantity of Candida growing from the catheter-drawn blood
cultures, compared with percutaneous blood cultures; catheter-drawn blood cultures growing
12 h before percutaneous blood
cultures [36, 48, 49, 198]; candidemia in a patient who has notreceived chemotherapy or steroid therapy within 1 month be-fore the onset of infection and who has no dissemination orother apparent source for the bloodstream infection except theintravascular catheter; candidemia in a patient receiving hy-peralimentation through the catheter; and persistent candide-mia unresponsive to systemic antifungal therapy [199, 200].Any of these conditions should raise suspicion for Candida -
related CRBSI and the need to remove the catheter. Manage-ment of candidemia and other fungal infections is summarizedin table 5 and ﬁgures 2–4, and in the recent IDSA guidelinesfor the management of candidiasis [201].
Other Gram-Positive Microorganisms
Recommendations
104. Diagnosis of CRBSI due to Corynebacterium ,Bacillus
and Micrococcus species requires at least 2 positive results of
blood cultures performed on samples obtained from differentsites (A-II).
105. For the management of these infections, catheter re-
moval is indicated for patients with a short-term CVC, and itis also indicated for patients with an infected long-term catheteror implanted port, unless there are no alternative intravascularaccess sites (B-III).
Evidence summary. Isolation of these microorganisms
from a single blood culture set does not prove true bloodstreaminfection. Conﬁrmation by multiple percutaneous blood cul-ture results positive for the same organism is required beforemeaningful conclusions can be drawn as to the signiﬁcance ofthe culture results. CRBSIs due to Micrococcus and Bacillus
species are difﬁcult to treat successfully unless the infected cath-eter is removed [202, 203]. A high incidence of CRBSI due toMicrococcus species has been reported among patients treat-
ed for pulmonary arterial hypertension with continuous epo-prostenol [204]. Speciﬁc management strategies for treatingCRBSI due to these pathogens are summarized in table 5.
HOW SHOULD YOU MANAGE SUPPURATIVE
THROMBOPHLEBITIS?
Recommendations
106. Suppurative thrombophlebitis should be suspected in
patients with persistent bacteremia or fungemia (i.e., patientsDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

36•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.whose blood culture results remain positive after 72 h of ad-
equate antimicrobial therapy) without another source of in-travascular infection (e.g., endocarditis) (A-II).
107. A diagnosis of suppurative thrombophlebitis requires
the presence of positive blood culture results plus the dem-onstration of a thrombus by radiographic testing (e.g., com-puted tomography, ultrasonography, or other methods) (A-II).
108. Surgical resection of the involved vein for patients with
suppurative thrombophlebitis should be limited to patientswith purulent superﬁcial veins or patients in whom the infec-tion extends beyond the vessel wall, as well as patients whoexperience failure of conservative therapy with an appropriateantimicrobial regimen (A-II).
109. The role of hep arin use in this setting is unresolved
(C-III).
110. Patients with suppurative thrombophlebitis due to
CRBSI should receive a minimum of 3–4 weeks of antimicrobialtherapy (B-III).
Evidence Summary
Suppurative thrombophlebitis may involve central or periph-
eral veins or arteries and result in high-grade and persistentbacteremia or fungemia [205–210]. Patients who undergo che-motherapy for malignancy and patients with solid tumors whodevelop S. aureus CRBSI may be at increased risk for suppu-
rative thrombophlebitis, because S. aureus is the most common
offending organism [207, 211–214]. Septic pulmonary emboliand other metastatic infections may complicate this condition[207, 215]. Patients may remain febrile and bacteremic or fun-gemic for prolonged periods of time despite the initiation ofappropriate antimicrobial therapy; however, few patients havephysical examination ﬁndings that suggest the diagnosis ofsuppurative thrombophlebitis [216]. Only a minority of pa-tients require surgery for the deﬁnite resolution of suppura-tive thrombophlebitis.
Because infected intravascular thrombus and intraluminal
abscess may remain intact after catheter removal, this infectionmay become manifest after catheter removal [209]. When pe-ripheral veins are involved, many older children and adult pa-tients have localized pain, erythema, and edema, and a smallersubset of patients demonstrate an abscess, palpable cord, orpurulent drainage [206, 217, 218]. A patient with suppurativethrombophlebitis caused by a peripheral arterial catheter maypresent with a pseudoaneurysm or embolic lesions of the in-volved hand [205, 210]. Patients with suppurative thrombo-phlebitis of the great central veins may have ipsilateral neck,chest, or upper extremity swelling [208, 209, 219]. There areno randomized studies to guide the optimal choice or durationof antibiotics, use of anticoagulants, thrombolytic agents, orexcision of the involved vessel, but anticoagulation with heparinshould be considered [220]. Speciﬁc management strategies forsuppurative thrombophlebitis are summarized in ﬁgures 2
and 3.
HOW IS PERSISTENT BLOODSTREAM
INFECTION AND INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITISMANAGED?
Recommendations
111. Catheter withdrawal is required in the management of
catheter-related infective endocarditis (A-II).
112. TEE should be done for patients with CRBSI who have
any of the following: a prosthetic heart valve, pacemaker, orimplantable deﬁbrillator; persistent bacteremia or fungemiaand/or fever
172 h after initiation of appropriate antibiotic
therapy and catheter removal, in addition to a search for met-astatic foci of infection, as indicated; and any case of S. aureus
CRBSI in which duration of therapy less than 4–6 weeks isbeing considered (A-II).
113. Unless the clinical condition of the patient dictates oth-
erwise, perform a TEE at least 5–7 days after the onset ofbacteremia or fungemia and consider repeating the TEE forpatients with a high index of suspicion for infective endocarditisin whom the initial TEE had negative ﬁndings (B-II).
114. Assess for suppurative thrombophlebitis as noted above
(B-II).
115. Infective endocarditis cannot be ruled out by negative
transthoracic echocardiograph ﬁndings alone (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Colonized intravascular catheters are the most commonly iden-tiﬁed source of nosocomial endocarditis and account for one-to two-thirds of reported cases [24, 25, 34, 221–224]. Staph-ylococci are the main etiologic agents, followed by Enterococcus
and Candida species [24, 25]. The risk of nosocomial endo-
carditis is greatest among patients with S. aureus bacteremia
who have prosthetic heart valves, pacemakers, malignancy, orwho are receiving dialysis through a catheter [24, 25, 34, 44,225, 226].
There are no data from randomized clinical trials to establish
the indications for TEE, but clinical examination has a lowsensitivity for diagnosing infective endocarditis. A TEE shouldbe offered to all patients with S. aureus bacteremia, with the
possible exception of patients whose fever and bacteremia re-solve within 72 h after catheter removal who have no underlyingcardiac predisposing conditions for endocarditis and no clinicalsigns of endocarditis [135].
Repeatedly positive blood culture results and/or unchanged
clinical status for 72 h after catheter removal usually reﬂectsserious sequelae of CRBSI, such as suppurative thrombophle-bitis, endocarditis, or metastatic foci of infection. Speciﬁc man-agement strategies for infective endocarditis due to CRBSI areDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •37summarized in ﬁgures 2 and 3, and general guidelines can be
found elsewhere [272].
HOW WOULD YOU DETECT AND MANAGE
AN OUTBREAK OF CRBSI?
Recommendations
116. When extrinsic contamination of infusate or catheter
ﬂush or lock solutions is suspected, public health authoritiesshould be alerted and the suspected product should be set asidefor culture (A-II).
117. Establish a case deﬁnition for patients who are likely
to have been exposed, including a time period, risk factors, andlocation of the patients (A-II).
118. A case-control study should be used to establish risk
factors for infection and to help elucidate potential sources ofcontamination (B-II).
119. E stablish relatedness of the suspected organisms by
reviewing the antibiotic susceptibility patterns, followed bymolecular ﬁngerprinting, such as pulsed-ﬁeld gel electropho-resis, polymerase chain reaction, or multilocus sequence typing(A-II).
120. Investigation of contamination involves a thorough re-
view of potential breaches in infection control practices in thehospital pharmacy and at the point of delivery of the infusate.This requires interviews with health care personnel and obser-vation of practices in the health care setting (A-II).
121. Cultures of potential point-source contaminants in the
environment should be performed, including intravenous med-ications administered to patients (A-II).
122. During the investigation, heightened surveillance to de-
tect new cases should be instituted (A-II).
123. Following identiﬁcation of a source, there should be
ongoing surveillance to conﬁrm eradication of the source ofinfection (A-II).
Evidence Summary
Outbreaks of CRBSI occur infrequently and are most com-monly caused by contaminated infusate [4]. These infectionscan be difﬁcult to recognize and are sufﬁciently uncommonthat they may go unnoticed by clinicians. Any ﬂuids admin-istered through an intravenous catheter can become contam-inated, either during the manufacturing process or while beingprepared or administered in the health care setting. Numerousoutbreaks of bloodstream infection related to contaminated,intravenously administered products have been reported [227–237]. In addition, medical equipment can become contami-nated because of inadequate infection-control practices [238–254]. In some instances, health care workers have adulteratedintravenous narcotics for illicit use and have contaminated thenarcotics in the process [255].
Bacteria that are most often implicated in contamination ofinfusate include gram-negative bacilli capable of reproducingat room temperature, such as Klebsiella species, Enterobacter
species, Serratia species, Burkholdaria cepacia, Ralstonia pick-
ettii, and Citrobacter freundii [4]. Gram-negative bacilli that are
unusual human pathogens or that are frequently found in theenvironment should alert the clinician to the possibility of con-taminated infusate.
Because the clinical picture of contaminated infusate is the
same as that of bloodstream infection due to other causes,contamination of infusate often will not be detected unless thereis a cluster of unusual bloodstream infections or several patientsdevelop a bloodstream infection due to the same organism.Contaminated infusate should be suspected when no other in-fection is present that would account for a bloodstream infec-tion or when the abrupt onset of shock occurs in associationwith infusion of parenteral medication or ﬂuid.
Contamination in the hospital pharmacy should be suspected
if an increase in bloodstream infection due to the same mi-croorganism occurs among patients on different hospital units.Suspected contamination should prompt an immediate andthorough investigation. Assistance from public health author-ities may be required, especially if related outbreaks occur inmultiple health care settings.
UNRESOLVED ISSUES
•Prior guidelines call for negative TEE ﬁndings for all patients
with S. aureus CRBSI to allow for a treatment duration of
only 2 weeks [1]. However, some experts believe that a TEEis not needed for patients without intravascular hardwarewho have rapid resolution of bacteremia and signs and symp-toms of acute infection.
•The true value and optimal duration of antimicrobial locksolutions as an adjunctive to systemic antibiotic therapy ad-ministered through the catheter remains unknown.
•Can antimicrobial therapy for CRBSI due to coagulase-neg-ative staphylococci be safely omitted for patients who are atlow risk for complications (i.e., those who no intravascularforeign body) when clinical signs and symptoms have re-solved promptly after catheter removal?
•The clinical impact of culturing and reporting colonized cath-eters for patients without bacteremia or fungemia is unclear.
•What is the optimal duration of therapy for S. lugdunensis
CRBSI?
•It remains unclear which strategy—CVC change over a guide-
wire, insertion of a new CVC at a new site, or watchful
waiting—is preferred among patients with suspected butunconﬁrmed catheter-related infection, pending blood cul-ture results.
•How should patients be treated who have positive catheter-drawn blood culture results and negative percutaneous bloodculture results?Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

38•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.•What is the optimal duration of antimicrobial use when an
infected CVC is not removed?
•Is the roll-plate method or the sonication method preferredfor the diagnosis of long-term catheter–related infection?
•Should blood cultures be routinely obtained after completinga course of antibiotics for CRBSI?
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
1. Determine whether patients with CRBSI due to S. aureus
orCandida species are treated with prompt catheter removal.
2. Determine how often catheters are removed from patients
with CRBSI who have
172 h of bacteremia or fungemia despite
administration of antimicrobial agents to which the pathogensare susceptible.
3. Determine how often patients with S. aureus bacteremia
for
172 h after catheter removal and appropriate antibiotic
therapy receive antibiotic treatment for at least 4 weeks.
4. For adult patients assessed for possible CRBSI who are
not receiving hemodialysis through a catheter, determinewhether 2 sets of blood cultures are obtained, one of percu-taneous blood samples and the other of blood samples obtainedthrough a catheter.
5. Determine whether blood culture bottles are labeled re-
garding the anatomic site or catheter used to obtain the bloodsample for culture.
6. Determine how often a b-lactam antibiotic is used instead
of vancomycin for b-lactam–susceptible staphylococcal CRBSI
among patients without a b-lactam allergy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Stijn Blot, Vance G. Fowler, Mark E. Rupp, Richard
Watkins, and Andreas F. Widmer, for their thoughtful review of earlier
drafts of the manuscript, and Dr. Jennifer Hanrahan, for assistance indrafting the outbreak management section.
Financial support. The Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Potential conﬂicts of interest. L.A.M. has received research funding
from Angiotech and Theravance and has served as a consultant to Cadence,Ash Access Technology, and CorMedix. M.A. is a consultant for Angiotechand Covidien. E.B. has served on advisory boards for or received researchor conference funds from Pﬁzer, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Cerexa, Car-dinal-Health, Sanoﬁ-Aventis, GlaxoSmithKline, Astellas and Astra-Zeneca.D.E.C. has served on the speaker’s bureaus of Pﬁzer, Wyeth, Sanoﬁ Pasteur,and Merck and has received research funding from Bard, Nomir MedicalTechnologies, Data and Safety Monitoring Board, and Johnson & Johnson.B.J.A.R. has received research grants from Schering-Plough and GileadSciences; has served as a speaker for Bayer, Schering-Plough, Pﬁzer, andTibotec; and has served as a consultant to Pﬁzer and Schering-Plough. P .F.has clinical research contracts with MedImmune and Tibotec. I.I.R. hasreceived research grants from Cubist, Schering-Plough, Versicor, Enzon,Cook Medical, Schering-Plough, and Wyeth; has served on the speakerbureaus of Merck, Pﬁzer, Cook, and Schering-Plough; has served as aconsultant to Clorox, Cubist, and Cook; and has received royalties relatedto patent licensed to American Medical Systems, Horizon Medical Products,and TyRx on which he is a coinventor. D.K.W. has served on the Pﬁzerspeaker’s bureau; has received research funding from GeneOhm Sciences,Verimetrix, and Astellas Pharma; and has served as a consultant to 3MHealthcare. N.P .O. and R.J.S.: no conﬂicts.
References
1. Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis2001 ; 32:1249–72.
2. Field MJ, Lohr KN, eds. Institute of Medicine Committee to Advise
the Public Health Service on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinicalpractice guidelines: directions for a new program. Washington, DC:National Academy Press, 1990 .
3. The periodic health examination. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic
Health Examination. Can Med Assoc J 1979 ; 121:1193–254.
4. Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett
JV , Brachman PS, eds. Hospital infections. Philidelphia, PA: Lippin-cott-Raven, 1998 :689–724.
5. Mermel LA. Prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections.
Ann Intern Med 2000 ; 132:391–402.
6. Maki DG, Kluger DM, Crnich CJ. The risk of bloodstream infection
in adults with different intravascular devices: a systematic review of200 published prospective studies. Mayo Clin Proc 2006 ; 81:1159–71.
7. O’Grady NP , Alexander M, Dellinger EP , et al. Guidelines for the
prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Centers forDisease Control and Prevention. MMWR Recomm Rep 2002 ; 51:1–29.
8. Safdar N, Mermel LA, Maki DG. The epidemiology of catheter-related
infection in the critically ill. In: O’Grady N, Pittet D, eds. Catheter-related infections in the critically ill. New Y ork, NY: Kluwer, 2004 :
1–23.
9. Maki DG, Stolz SM, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. Prevention of central
venous catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med1997 ; 127:257–66.
10. Raad I, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey
GP . Ultrastructural analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a quan-titative relationship between luminal colonization and duration ofplacement. J Infect Dis 1993 ; 168:400–7.
11. Renaud B, Brun-Buisson C. Outcomes of primary and catheter-related
bacteremia: a cohort and case-control study in critically ill patients.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 163:1584–90.
12. Dimick JB, Pelz RK, Consunji R, Swoboda SM, Hendrix CW, Lip-
sett PA. Increased resource use associated with catheter-relatedbloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. ArchSurg 2001 ; 136:229–34.
13. Blot SI, Depuydt P , Annemans L, et al. Clinical and economic out-
comes in critically ill patients with nosocomial catheter-related blood-stream infections. Clin Infect Dis 2005 ; 41:1591–8.
14. Warren DK, Quadir WW, Hollenbeak CS, Elward AM, Cox MJ, Fraser
VJ. Attributable cost of catheter-associated bloodstream infectionsamong intensive care patients in a nonteaching hospital. Crit CareMed 2006 ; 34:2084–9.
15. Safdar N, Maki DG. Inﬂammation at the insertion site is not predictive
of catheter-related bloodstream infection with short-term, noncuffedcentral venous catheters. Crit Care Med 2002 ; 30:2632–5.
16. Shukrallah B, Hanna H, Hachem R, Ghannam D, Chatzinikolaou I,
Raad I. Correlation between early clinical response after catheter re-moval and diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infection. DiagnMicrobiol Infect Dis 2007 ; 58:453–7.
17. Kiehn TE, Armstrong D. Changes in the spectrum of organisms caus-
ing bacteremia and fungemia in immunocompromised patients dueto venous access devices. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1990 ;9 :
869–72.
18. Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related
infections. Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996 ; 17:438–73.
19. Mayhall CG. Diagnosis and management of infections of implantableDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •39devices used for prolonged venous access. Curr Clin Top Infect Dis
1992 ; 12:83–110.
20. Raad, II, Hanna HA, Darouiche RO. Diagnosis of catheter-related
bloodstream infections: is it necessary to culture the subcutaneouscatheter segment? Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2001 ; 20:566–8.
21. Mermel LA, McCormick RD, Springman SR, Maki DG. The patho-
genesis and epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmo-nary artery Swan-Ganz catheters: a prospective study utilizing mo-lecular subtyping. Am J Med 1991 ; 91:197S-205S.
22. Brun-Buisson C, Abrouk F, Legrand P , Huet Y, Larabi S, Rapin M.
Diagnosis of central venous catheter-related sepsis: critical level ofquantitative tip cultures. Arch Intern Med 1987 ; 147:873–7.
23. Maki DG, Weise CE, Saraﬁn HW. A semiquantitative culture method
for identifying intravenous-catheter–related infection. N Engl J Med1977 ; 296:1305–9.
24. Cleri DJ, Corrado ML, Seligman SJ. Quantitative culture of intra-
venous catheters and other intravascular inserts. J Infect Dis 1980 ;
141:781–6.
25. Sherertz RJ, Raad, II, Belani A, et al. Three-year experience with
sonicated vascular catheter cultures in a clinical microbiology labo-ratory. J Clin Microbiol 1990 ; 28:76–82.
26. Sherertz RJ, Heard SO, Raad II. Diagnosis of triple-lumen catheter
infection: comparison of roll plate, sonication, and ﬂushing meth-odologies. J Clin Microbiol 1997 ; 35:641–6.
27. Bouza E, Alvarado N, Alcala L, et al. A prospective, randomized, and
comparative study of 3 different methods for the diagnosis of intra-vascular catheter colonization. Clin Infect Dis 2005 ; 40:1096–100.
28. Douard MC, Arlet G, Longuet P , et al. Diagnosis of venous access
port-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 1999 ; 29:1197–202.
29. Longuet P , Douard MC, Arlet G, Molina JM, Benoit C, Leport C.
Venous access port–related bacteremia in patients with acquired im-munodeﬁciency syndrome or cancer: the reservoir as a diagnostic andtherapeutic tool. Clin Infect Dis 2001 ; 32:1776–83.
30. Whitman ED, Boatman AM. Comparison of diagnostic specimens
and methods to evaluate infected venous access ports. Am J Surg1995 ; 170:665–9; discussion 69–70.
31. Schmitt SK, Knapp C, Hall GS, Longworth DL, McMahon JT, Wash-
ington JA. Impact of chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine-impregnat-ed central venous catheters on in vitro quantitation of catheter-asso-ciated bacteria. J Clin Microbiol 1996 ; 34:508–11.
32. Schierholz JM, Bach A, Fleck C, Beuth J, Konig D, Pulverer G. Mea-
surement of ultrasonic-induced chlorhexidine liberation: correlationof the activity of chlorhexidine-silver-sulfadiazine-impregnated cath-eters to agar roll technique and broth culture. J Hosp Infect 2000 ;
44:141–5.
33. Bouza E, Alvarado N, Alcala L, Perez MJ, Rincon C, Munoz P . A
randomized and prospective study of 3 procedures for the diagnosisof catheter-related bloodstream infection without catheter withdrawal.Clin Infect Dis 2007 ; 44:820–6.
34. Irwig L, Tosteson AN, Gatsonis C, et al. Guidelines for meta-analyses
evaluating diagnostic tests. Ann Intern Med 1994 ; 120:667–76.
35. Safdar N, Fine JP , Maki DG. Meta-analysis: methods for diagnosing
intravascular device-related bloodstream infection. Ann Intern Med2005 ; 142:451–66.
36. Gaur AH, Flynn PM, Heine DJ, Giannini MA, Shenep JL, Hayden
RT. Diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infections among pe-diatric oncology patients lacking a peripheral culture, using differ-ential time to detection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005 ; 24:445–9.
37. National Healthcare Safety Network, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. The National Healthcare Safety Network [NHSN] man-ual: patient safety component protocol. January 2008. Available at:http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/ dhqp/pdf/nhsn/NHSN_ManualPatient
SafetyProtocol_CURRENT.pdf. Accessed 30 July 2008.
38. Bekeris LG, Tworek JA, Walsh MK, Valenstein PN. Trends in blood
culture contamination: a College of American Pathologists Q-Tracksstudy of 356 institutions. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2005 ; 129:1222–5.39. Little JR, Murray PR, Traynor PS, Spitznagel E. A randomized trial
of povidone-iodine compared with iodine tincture for venipuncturesite disinfection: effects on rates of blood culture contamination. AmJM e d 1999 ; 107:119–25.
40. Mimoz O, Karim A, Mercat A, et al. Chlorhexidine compared with
povidone-iodine as skin preparation before blood culture: a random-ized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999 ; 131:834–7.
41. Ramsook C, Childers K, Cron SG, Nirken M. Comparison of blood-
culture contamination rates in a pediatric emergency room: newlyinserted intravenous catheters versus venipuncture. Infect ControlHosp Epidemiol 2000 ; 21:649–51.
42. Norberg A, Christopher NC, Ramundo ML, Bower JR, Berman SA.
Contamination rates of blood cultures obtained by dedicated phle-botomy vs intravenous catheter. JAMA 2003 ; 289:726–9.
43. Everts RJ, Vinson EN, Adholla PO, Reller LB. Contamination of cath-
eter-drawn blood cultures. J Clin Microbiol 2001 ; 39:3393–4.
44. DesJardin JA, Falagas ME, Ruthazer R, et al. Clinical utility of blood
cultures drawn from indwelling central venous catheters in hospital-ized patients with cancer. Ann Intern Med 1999 ; 131:641–7.
45. Martinez JA, DesJardin JA, Aronoff M, Supran S, Nasraway SA, Snyd-
man DR. Clinical utility of blood cultures drawn from central venousor arterial catheters in critically ill surgical patients. Crit Care Med2002 ; 30:7–13.
46. Haimi-Cohen Y, Vellozzi EM, Rubin LG. Initial concentration of
Staphylococcus epidermidis in simulated pediatric blood cultures cor-
relates with time to positive results with the automated, continuouslymonitored BACTEC blood culture system. J Clin Microbiol 2002 ;4 0 :
898–901.
47. Blot F, Schmidt E, Nitenberg G, et al. Earlier positivity of central-
venous- versus peripheral-blood cultures is highly predictive of cath-eter-related sepsis. J Clin Microbiol 1998 ; 36:105–9.
48. Blot F, Nitenberg G, Chachaty E, et al. Diagnosis of catheter-related
bacteraemia: a prospective comparison of the time to positivity ofhub-blood versus peripheral-blood cultures. Lancet 1999 ; 354:1071–7.
49. Raad I, Hanna HA, Alakech B, Chatzinikolaou I, Johnson MM, Tar-
rand J. Differential time to positivity: a useful method for diagnosingcatheter-related bloodstream infections. Ann Intern Med 2004 ;1 4 0 :
18–25.
50. Rijnders BJ, Verwaest C, Peetermans WE, et al. Difference in time to
positivity of hub-blood versus nonhub-blood cultures is not usefulfor the diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infection in criticallyill patients. Crit Care Med 2001 ; 29:1399–403.
51. Warwick S, Wilks M, Hennessy E, et al. Use of quantitative 16S
ribosomal DNA detection for diagnosis of central vascular catheter-associated bacterial infection. J Clin Microbiol 2004 ; 42:1402–8.
52. Wilcox MH, Tack KJ, Bouza E, et al. Complicated skin and skin-
structure infections and catheter-related bloodstream infections: non-inferiority of linezolid in a phase 3 study. Clin Infect Dis 2009 ; 48:
203–12.
53. Miragaia M, Couto I, Pereira SF, et al. Molecular characterization of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis clones: evidence of
geographic dissemination. J Clin Microbiol 2002 ; 40:430–8.
54. Pottumarthy S, Fritsche TR, Jones RN. Evaluation of alternative disk
diffusion methods for detecting mecA-mediated oxacillin resistancein an international collection of staphylococci: validation report fromthe SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program. Diagn MicrobiolInfect Dis 2005 ; 51:57–62.
55. Moise PA, Sakoulas G, Forrest A, Schentag JJ. Vancomycin in vitro
bactericidal activity and its relationship to efﬁcacy in clearance ofmethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2007 ; 51:2582–6.
56. Sakoulas G, Moise-Broder PA, Schentag J, Forrest A, Moellering RC
Jr, Eliopoulos GM. Relationship of MIC and bactericidal activity toefﬁcacy of vancomycin for treatment of methicillin-resistant Staph-
ylococcus aureus bacteremia. J Clin Microbiol 2004 ; 42:2398–402.
57. Rijnders BJ, Vandecasteele SJ, Van Wijngaerden E, De Munter P , Pee-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

40•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.termans WE. Use of semiautomatic treatment advice to improve com-
pliance with Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines for
treatment of intravascular catheter-related infection: a before-after
study. Clin Infect Dis 2003 ; 37:980–3.
58. Atkinson JB, Chamberlin K, Boody BA. A prospective randomized
trial of urokinase as an adjuvant in the treatment of proven Hickman
catheter sepsis. J Pediatr Surg 1998 ; 33:714–6.
59. La Quaglia MP , Caldwell C, Lucas A, et al. A prospective randomized
double-blind trial of bolus urokinase in the treatment of established
Hickman catheter sepsis in children. J Pediatr Surg 1994 ; 29:742–5.
60. Maki DG, Ringer M. Risk factors for infusion-related phlebitis with
small peripheral venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. AnnIntern Med 1991 ; 114:845–54.
61. Bregenzer T, Conen D, Sakmann P , Widmer AF. Is routine replace-
ment of peripheral intravenous catheters necessary? Arch Intern Med
1998 ; 158:151–6.
62. Rello J, Coll P , Prats G. Evaluation of culture techniques for diagnosis
of catheter-related sepsis in critically ill patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol
Infect Dis 1992 ; 11:1192–3.
63. Esteve F, Pujol M, Limon E, et al. Bloodstream infection related to
catheter connections: a prospective trial of two connection systems.
J Hosp Infect 2007 ; 67:30–4.
64. Koh DB, Gowardman JR, Rickard CM, Robertson IK, Brown A. Pro-
spective study of peripheral arterial catheter infection and comparisonwith concurrently sited central venous catheters. Crit Care Med
2008 ; 36:397–402.
65. Mermel LA, Maki DG. Infectious complications of Swan-Ganz pul-
monary artery catheters: pathogenesis, epidemiology, prevention, and
management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 ; 149:1020–36.
66. Ekkelenkamp MB, van der Bruggen T, van de Vijver DA, Wolfs TF,
Bonten MJ. Bacteremic complications of intravascular catheters col-
onized with Staphylococcus aureus. Clin Infect Dis 2008 ; 46:114–8.
67. Peacock SJ, Eddleston M, Emptage A, King A, Crook DW. Positive
intravenous line tip cultures as predictors of bacteraemia. J HospInfect 1998 ; 40:35–8.
68. O’Grady NP , Barie PS, Bartlett JG, et al. Guidelines for evaluation of
new fever in critically ill adult patients: 2008 update from the Amer-ican College of Critical Care Medicine and the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. Crit Care Med 2008 ; 36:1330–49.
69. Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and
subclavian venous catheterization in critically ill patients: a random-ized controlled trial. Jama 2001 ; 286:700–7.
70. Rijnders BJ, Peetermans WE, Verwaest C, Wilmer A, Van Wijngaerden
E. Watchful waiting versus immediate catheter removal in ICU pa-tients with suspected catheter-related infection: a randomized trial.Intensive Care Med 2004 ; 30:1073–80.
71. Pettigrew RA, Lang SD, Haydock DA, Parry BR, Bremner DA, Hill
GL. Catheter-related sepsis in patients on intravenous nutrition: aprospective study of quantitative catheter cultures and guidewirechanges for suspected sepsis. Br J Surg 1985 ; 72:52–5.
72. Chatzinikolaou I, Hanna H, Hachem R, Alakech B, Tarrand J, Raad
I. Differential quantitative blood cultures for the diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infections associated with short- and long-termcatheters: a prospective study. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2004 ;5 0 :
167–72.
73. Martinez E, Mensa J, Rovira M, et al. Central venous catheter ex-
change by guidewire for treatment of catheter-related bacteraemia inpatients undergoing BMT or intensive chemotherapy. Bone MarrowTransplant 1999 ; 23:41–4.
74. Carlisle EJ, Blake P , McCarthy F, Vas S, Uldall R. Septicemia in long-
term jugular hemodialysis catheters; eradicating infection by changingthe catheter over a guidewire. Int J Artif Organs 1991 ; 14:150–3.
75. Shaffer D. Catheter-related sepsis complicating long-term, tunnelled
central venous dialysis catheters: management by guidewire exchange.Am J Kidney Dis 1995 ; 25:593–6.
76. Robinson D, Suhocki P , Schwab SJ. Treatment of infected tunneledvenous access hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney
Int 1998 ; 53:1792–4.
77. Porter KA, Bistrian BR, Blackburn GL. Guidewire catheter exchange
with triple culture technique in the management of catheter sepsis.JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1988 ; 12:628–32.
78. Baltimore RS. Neonatal nosocomial infections. Semin Perinatol
1998 ; 22:25–32.
79. Almuneef MA, Memish ZA, Balkhy HH, Hijazi O, Cunningham G,
Francis C. Rate, risk factors and outcomes of catheter-related blood-stream infection in a paediatric intensive care unit in Saudi Arabia.J Hosp Infect 2006 ; 62:207–13.
80. Gilad J, Borer A. Prevention of catheter-related bloodstream infections
in the neonatal intensive care setting. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther2006 ; 4:861–73.
81. Jarvis WR, Edwards JR, Culver DH, et al. Nosocomial infection rates
in adult and pediatric intensive care units in the United States. Na-tional Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Am J Med 1991 ;
91:185S-91S.
82. Garland JS, Alex CP , Henrickson KJ, McAuliffe TL, Maki DG. A
vancomycin-heparin lock solution for prevention of nosocomialbloodstream infection in critically ill neonates with peripherally in-serted central venous catheters: a prospective, randomized trial. Pe-diatrics 2005 ; 116:e198–205.
83. Wiener ES, McGuire P , Stolar CJ, et al. The CCSG prospective study
of venous access devices: an analysis of insertions and causes forremoval. J Pediatr Surg 1992 ; 27:155–63; discussion 63–4.
84. Gaynes RP , Edwards JR, Jarvis WR, Culver DH, Tolson JS, Martone
WJ. Nosocomial infections among neonates in high-risk nurseries inthe United States. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance Sys-tem. Pediatrics 1996 ; 98:357–61.
85. Piedra PA, Dryja DM, LaScolea LJ Jr. Incidence of catheter-associated
gram-negative bacteremia in children with short bowel syndrome. JClin Microbiol 1989 ; 27:1317–9.
86. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System Report,
data summary from January 1992 through June 2004, issued October2004. Am J Infect Control 2004 ; 32:470–85.
87. Franklin JA, Gaur AH, Shenep JL, Hu XJ, Flynn PM. In situ diagnosis
of central venous catheter-related bloodstream infection without pe-ripheral blood culture. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004 ; 23:614–8.
88. Hartman GE, Shochat SJ. Management of septic complications as-
sociated with Silastic catheters in childhood malignancy. Pediatr InfectDis J 1987 ; 6:1042–7.
89. Flynn PM, Shenep JL, Stokes DC, Barrett FF. In situ management of
conﬁrmed central venous catheter-related bacteremia. Pediatr InfectDis J 1987 ; 6:729–34.
90. Wiener ES. Catheter sepsis: the central venous line Achilles’ heel.
Semin Pediatr Surg 1995 ; 4:207–14.
91. Dato VM, Dajani AS. Candidemia in children with central venous
catheters: role of catheter removal and amphotericin B therapy. Pe-diatr Infect Dis J 1990 ; 9:309–14.
92. Jones GR, Konsler GK, Dunaway RP , Lacey SR, Azizkhan RG. Pro-
spective analysis of urokinase in the treatment of catheter sepsis inpediatric hematology-oncology patients. J Pediatr Surg 1993 ; 28:
350–5; discussion 55–7.
93. Johnson DC, Johnson FL, Goldman S. Preliminary results treating
persistent central venous catheter infections with the antibiotic lock
technique in pediatric patients. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994 ; 13:930–1.
94. Castagnola E, Marazzi MG, Tacchella A, Giacchino R. Broviac cath-
eter-related candidemia. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005 ; 24:747.
95. Buckler BS, Sams RN, Goei VL, et al. Treatment of central venous
catheter fungal infection using liposomal amphotericin-B lock ther-apy. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2008 ; 27:762–4.
96. Stovroff M, Teague WG. Intravenous access in infants and children.
Pediatr Clin North Am 1998 ; 45:1373–93, viii.
97. Huskins WC, Goldmann DA. Nosocomial infections. In: Feigin RD,
Cherry JD, eds. Textbook of pediatric infectious diseases. Philadelphia,PA: WB Saunders, 1998 :2545–85.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •4198. Decker MD, Edwards KM. Central venous catheter infections. Pediatr
Clin North Am 1988 ; 35:579–612.
99. Poole CV , Carlton D, Bimbo L, Allon M. Treatment of catheter-related
bacteraemia with an antibiotic lock protocol: effect of bacterial path-
ogen. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004 ; 19:1237–44.
100. Krishnasami Z, Carlton D, Bimbo L, et al. Management of hemo-
dialysis catheter-related bacteremia with an adjunctive antibiotic locksolution. Kidney Int 2002 ; 61:1136–42.
101. Saad TF. Bacteremia associated with tunneled, cuffed hemodialysis
catheters. Am J Kidney Dis 1999 ; 34:1114–24.
102. Allon M. Dialysis catheter-related bacteremia: treatment and pro-
phylaxis. Am J Kidney Dis 2004 ; 44:779–91.
103. Ali MZ, Goetz MB. A meta-analysis of the relative efﬁcacy and toxicity
of single daily dosing versus multiple daily dosing of aminoglycosides.Clin Infect Dis 1997 ; 24:796–809.
104. Fogel MA, Nussbaum PB, Feintzeig ID, Hunt WA, Gavin JP , Kim RC.
Cefazolin in chronic hemodialysis patients: a safe, effective alternativeto vancomycin. Am J Kidney Dis 1998 ; 32:401–9.
105. Barth RH, DeVincenzo N. Use of vancomycin in high-ﬂux hemo-
dialysis: experience with 130 courses of therapy. Kidney Int 1996 ;5 0 :
929–36.
106. Lund GB, Trerotola SO, Scheel PF Jr, et al. Outcome of tunneled
hemodialysis catheters placed by radiologists. Radiology 1996 ; 198:
467–72.
107. Marr KA, Sexton DJ, Conlon PJ, Corey GR, Schwab SJ, Kirkland KB.
Catheter-related bacteremia and outcome of attempted catheter sal-vage in patients undergoing hemodialysis. Ann Intern Med 1997 ;1 2 7 :
275–80.
108. Pourchez T, Moriniere P , Fournier A, Pietri J. Use of Permcath (Quin-
ton) catheter in uraemic patients in whom the creation of conven-tional vascular access for haemodialysis is difﬁcult. Nephron 1989 ;
53:297–302.
109. Swartz RD, Messana JM, Boyer CJ, Lunde NM, Weitzel WF, Hartman
TL. Successful use of cuffed central venous hemodialysis cathetersinserted percutaneously. J Am Soc Nephrol 1994 ; 4:1719–25.
110. Mokrzycki MH, Zhang M, Cohen H, Golestaneh L, Laut JM, Rosen-
berg SO. Tunnelled haemodialysis catheter bacteraemia: risk factorsfor bacteraemia recurrence, infectious complications and mortality.Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006 ; 21:1024–31.
111. Tanriover B, Carlton D, Saddekni S, et al. Bacteremia associated with
tunneled dialysis catheters: comparison of two treatment strategies.Kidney Int 2000 ; 57:2151–5.
112. Beathard GA. Management of bacteremia associated with tunneled-
cuffed hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999 ; 10:1045–9.
113. Capdevila JA, Segarra A, Planes AM, et al. Successful treatment of
haemodialysis catheter-related sepsis without catheter removal. Ne-phrol Dial Transplant 1993 ; 8:231–4.
114. Fernandez-Hidalgo N, Almirante B, Calleja R, et al. Antibiotic-lock
therapy for long-term intravascular catheter-related bacteraemia: re-sults of an open, non-comparative study. J Antimicrob Chemother2006 ; 57:1172–80.
115. Maya ID, Carlton D, Estrada E, Allon M. Treatment of dialysis cath-
eter-related Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia with an antibiotic lock:
a quality improvement report. Am J Kidney Dis 2007 ; 50:289–95.
116. Raad I, Davis S, Khan A, Tarrand J, Elting L, Bodey GP . Impact of
central venous catheter removal on the recurrence of catheter-related
coagulase-negative staphylococcal bacteremia. Infect Control HospEpidemiol 1992 ; 13:215–21.
117. Gaillard JL, Merlino R, Pajot N, et al. Conventional and nonconven-
tional modes of vancomycin administration to decontaminate theinternal surface of catheters colonized with coagulase-negative staph-ylococci. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1990 ; 14:593–7.
118. Simon VC, Simon M. Antibacterial activity of teicoplanin and van-
comycin in combination with rifampicin, fusidic acid or fosfomycinagainst staphylococci on vein catheters. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl1990 ; 72:14–9.
119. Guggenbichler JP , Berchtold D, Allerberger F, et al. In vitro and invivo effect of antibiotics on catheters colonized by staphylococci. EurJ Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1992 ; 11:408–15.
120. Ramirez de Arellano E, Pascual A, Martinez-Martinez L, Perea EJ.
Activity of eight antibacterial agents on Staphylococcus epidermidis
attached to Teﬂon catheters. J Med Microbiol 1994 ; 40:43–7.
121. Kropec A, Huebner J, Wursthorn M, Daschner FD. In vitro activity
of vancomycin and teicoplanin against Staphylococcus aureus and
Staphylococcus epidermidis colonizing catheters. Eur J Clin Microbiol
Infect Dis 1993 ; 12:545–8.
122. Pascual A, Ramirez de Arellano E, Martinez Martinez L, Perea EJ.
Effect of polyurethane catheters and bacterial bioﬁlms on the in-vitro
activity of antimicrobials against Staphylococcus epidermidis. J Hosp
Infect 1993 ; 24:211–8.
123. Rijnders BJ, Van Wijngaerden E, Vandecasteele SJ, Stas M, Peetermans
WE. Treatment of long-term intravascular catheter-related bacterae-mia with antibiotic lock: randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J An-
timicrob Chemother 2005 ; 55:90–4.
124. Fortun J, Grill F, Martin-Davila P , et al. Treatment of long-term in-
travascular catheter-related bacteraemia with antibiotic-lock therapy.
J Antimicrob Chemother 2006 ; 58:816–21.
125. Krzywda EA, Andris DA, Edmiston CE Jr, Quebbeman EJ. Treatment
of Hickman catheter sepsis using antibiotic lock technique. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995 ; 16:596–8.
126. Benoit JL, Carandang G, Sitrin M, Arnow PM. Intraluminal antibiotic
treatment of central venous catheter infections in patients receivingparenteral nutrition at home. Clin Infect Dis 1995 ; 21:1286–8.
127. Arnow PM, Kushner R. Malassezia furfur catheter infection cured
with antibiotic lock therapy. Am J Med 1991 ; 90:128–30.
128. Soriano A, Bregada E, Marques JM, et al. Decreasing gradient of
antibiotic concentration in the lumen of catheters locked with van-comycin. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2007 ; 26:659–61.
129. Anthony TU, Rubin LG. Stability of antibiotics used for antibiotic-
lock treatment of infections of implantable venous devices (ports).Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999 ; 43:2074–6.
130. Droste JC, Jeraj HA, MacDonald A, Farrington K. Stability and in
vitro efﬁcacy of antibiotic-heparin lock solutions potentially usefulfor treatment of central venous catheter-related sepsis. J AntimicrobChemother 2003 ; 51:849–55.
131. Onland W, Shin CE, Fustar S, Rushing T, Wong WY. Ethanol-lock
technique for persistent bacteremia of long-term intravascular devices
in pediatric patients. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2006 ; 160:1049–53.
132. Zinkernagel AS, Zinkernagel MS, Elzi MV , et al. Signiﬁcance of Staph-
ylococcus lugdunensis bacteremia: report of 28 cases and review of the
literature. Infection 2008 ; 36:314–21.
133. Byers K, Anglim A, al. E. Case fatality rate for catheter-related blood-
stream infections (CRSBI): a meta-analysis [abstract 43]. In: Programand abstracts of the Fifth Annual Meeting of the Society for HospitalEpidemiology of America (San Diego). 1995 :23.
134. Rosen AB, Fowler VG Jr, Corey GR, et al. Cost-effectiveness of trans-
esophageal echocardiography to determine the duration of therapyfor intravascular catheter-associated Staphylococcus aureus bactere-
mia. Ann Intern Med 1999 ; 130:810–20.
135. Pigrau C, Rodriguez D, Planes AM, et al. Management of catheter-
related Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia: when may sonographic
study be unnecessary? Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2003 ; 22:713–9.
136. Iannini PB, Crossley K. Therapy of Staphylococcus aureus bactere-
mia associated with a removable focus of infection. Ann Intern Med1976 ; 84:558–60.
137. Mylotte JM, McDermott C, Spooner JA. Prospective study of 114
consecutive episodes of Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Rev Infect
Dis 1987 ; 9:891–907.
138. Raad, II, Sabbagh MF. Optimal duration of therapy for catheter-
related Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia: a study of 55 cases and
review. Clin Infect Dis 1992 ; 14:75–82.
139. Malanoski GJ, Samore MH, Pefanis A, Karchmer AW. Staphylococcus
aureus catheter-associated bacteremia. Minimal effective therapy andDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

42•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.unusual infectious complications associated with arterial sheath cath-
eters. Arch Intern Med 1995 ; 155:1161–6.
140. Ehni WF, Reller LB. Short-course therapy for catheter-associated
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1989 ; 149:533–6.
141. Cabell CH, Fowler VG Jr. Importance of aggressive evaluation in
patients with Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Am Heart J 2004 ; 147:
379–80.
142. Abraham J, Mansour C, Veledar E, Khan B, Lerakis S. Staphylococcus
aureus bacteremia and endocarditis: the Grady Memorial Hospital
experience with methicillin-sensitive S. aureus and methicillin-resis-
tant S. aureus bacteremia. Am Heart J 2004 ; 147:536–9.
143. Fowler VG Jr, Olsen MK, Corey GR, et al. Clinical identiﬁers of com-
plicated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 2003 ; 163:
2066–72.
144. Fowler VG Jr, Justice A, Moore C, et al. Risk factors for hematogenous
complications of intravascular catheter-associated Staphylococcus au-
reus bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis 2005 ; 40:695–703.
145. Fowler VG Jr, Miro JM, Hoen B, et al. Staphylococcus aureus endo-
carditis: a consequence of medical progress. Jama 2005 ; 293:3012–21.
146. Chang FY, MacDonald BB, Peacock JE Jr, et al. A prospective mul-
ticenter study of Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia: incidence of en-
docarditis, risk factors for mortality, and clinical impact of methicillinresistance. Medicine (Baltimore) 2003 ; 82:322–32.
147. Fowler VG Jr, Sanders LL, Sexton DJ, et al. Outcome of Staphylococcus
aureus bacteremia according to compliance with recommendations
of infectious diseases specialists: experience with 244 patients. ClinInfect Dis 1998 ; 27:478–86.
148. Reilly JJ Jr, Steed DL, Ritter PS. Indwelling venous access catheters
in patients with acute leukemia. Cancer 1984 ; 53:219–23.
149. Roder BL, Wandall DA, Frimodt-Moller N, Espersen F, Skinhoj P ,
Rosdahl VT. Clinical features of Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis: a
10-year experience in Denmark. Arch Intern Med 1999 ; 159:462–9.
150. Fowler VG Jr, Li J, Corey GR, et al. Role of echocardiography in
evaluation of patients with Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia: expe-
rience in 103 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997 ; 30:1072–8.
151. Sullenberger AL, Avedissian LS, Kent SM. Importance of transesopha-
geal echocardiography in the evaluation of Staphylococcus aureus bac-
teremia. J Heart Valve Dis 2005 ; 14:23–8.
152. Sochowski RA, Chan KL. Implication of negative results on a mono-
plane transesophageal echocardiographic study in patients with sus-pected infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993 ; 21:216–21.
153. Kuizon D, Gordon SM, Dolmatch BL. Single-lumen subcutaneous
ports inserted by interventional radiologists in patients undergoingchemotherapy: incidence of infection and outcome of attempted cath-eter salvage. Arch Intern Med 2001 ; 161:406–10.
154. Ruhe JJ, Menon A. Clinical signiﬁcance of isolated Staphylococcus aureus
central venous catheter tip cultures. Clin Microbiol Infect 2006 ;1 2 :
933–6.
155. Wisplinghoff H, Bischoff T, Tallent SM, Seifert H, Wenzel RP , Edmond
MB. Nosocomial bloodstream infections in US hospitals: analysis of24,179 cases from a prospective nationwide surveillance study. ClinInfect Dis 2004 ; 39:309–17.
156. Jones RN, Marshall SA, Pfaller MA, et al. Nosocomial enterococcal
blood stream infections in the SCOPE Program: antimicrobial resis-
tance, species occurrence, molecular testing results, and laboratorytesting accuracy. SCOPE Hospital Study Group. Diagn Microbiol In-
fect Dis 1997 ; 29:95–102.
157. Gonzales RD, Schreckenberger PC, Graham MB, Kelkar S, DenBesten
K, Quinn JP . Infections due to vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus fae-
cium resistant to linezolid. Lancet 2001 ; 357:1179.
158. Kanafani ZA, Federspiel JJ, Fowler VG Jr. Infective endocarditis caused
by daptomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis : a case report. Scand J
Infect Dis 2007 ; 39:75–7.
159. Vergis EN, Hayden MK, Chow JW, et al. Determinants of vancomycin
resistance and mortality rates in enterococcal bacteremia. a prospec-
tive multicenter study. Ann Intern Med 2001 ; 135:484–92.
160. Anderson DJ, Murdoch DR, Sexton DJ, et al. Risk factors for infectiveendocarditis in patients with enterococcal bacteremia: a case-control
study. Infection 2004 ; 32:72–7.
161. Fernandez-Guerrero ML, Herrero L, Bellver M, Gadea I, Roblas RF,
de Gorgolas M. Nosocomial enterococcal endocarditis: a serious haz-ard for hospitalized patients with enterococcal bacteraemia. J InternMed 2002 ; 252:510–5.
162. DiazGranados CA, Jernigan JA. Impact of vancomycin resistance on
mortality among patients with neutropenia and enterococcal blood-stream infection. J Infect Dis 2005 ; 191:588–95.
163. Bhavnani SM, Drake JA, Forrest A, et al. A nationwide, multicenter,
case-control study comparing risk factors, treatment, and outcomefor vancomycin-resistant and -susceptible enterococcal bacteremia.Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2000 ; 36:145–58.
164. Maki DG, Agger WA. Enterococcal bacteremia: clinical features, the
risk of endocarditis, and management. Medicine (Baltimore) 1988 ;
67:248–69.
165. Gray J, Marsh PJ, Stewart D, Pedler SJ. Enterococcal bacteraemia: a
prospective study of 125 episodes. J Hosp Infect 1994 ; 27:179–86.
166. Sandoe JA, Witherden IR, Au-Yeung HK, Kite P , Kerr KG, Wilcox
MH. Enterococcal intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infec-tion: management and outcome of 61 consecutive cases. J AntimicrobChemother 2002 ; 50:577–82.
167. Gavalda J, Len O, Miro JM, et al. Brief communication: treatment
ofEnterococcus faecalis endocarditis with ampicillin plus ceftriaxone.
Ann Intern Med 2007 ; 146:574–9.
168. El-Khoury J, Fishman JA. Linezolid in the treatment of vancomycin-
resistant Enterococcus faecium in solid organ transplant recipients:
report of a multicenter compassionate-use trial. Transpl Infect Dis2003 ; 5:121–5.
169. Linden PK, Moellering RC Jr, Wood CA, et al. Treatment of vanco-
mycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium infections with quinupristin/dal-
fopristin. Clin Infect Dis 2001 ; 33:1816–23.
170. Poutsiaka DD, Skifﬁngton S, Miller KB, Hadley S, Snydman DR.
Daptomycin in the treatment of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
faecium bacteremia in neutropenic patients. J Infect 2007 ; 54:567–71.
171. Lautenbach E, Schuster MG, Bilker WB, Brennan PJ. The role of
chloramphenicol in the treatment of bloodstream infection due tovancomycin-resistant Enterococcus. Clin Infect Dis 1998 ; 27:1259–65.
172. Seifert H. Catheter-related infections due to gram-negative bacilli. In:
Seifert H, Jansen B, Farr BM, eds. Catheter-Related Infections. NewYork, NY: Marcel Drekker, 1997 :111–38.
173. Jacoby GA, Munoz-Price LS. The new b-lactamases. N Engl J Med
2005 ; 352:380–91.
174. Raymond DP , Pelletier SJ, Crabtree TD, Evans HL, Pruett TL, Sawyer
RG. Impact of antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacilli infections onoutcome in hospitalized patients. Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31:1035–41.
175. Ibrahim EH, Sherman G, Ward S, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. The inﬂuence
of inadequate antimicrobial treatment of bloodstream infections onpatient outcomes in the ICU setting. Chest 2000 ; 118:146–55.
176. Dellinger RP , Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign:
international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septicshock: 2008 . Crit Care Med 2008 ; 36:296–327.
177. Paterson DL, Ko WC, Von Gottberg A, et al. Outcome of cephalo-
sporin treatment for serious infections due to apparently suscepti-
ble organisms producing extended-spectrum beta-lactamases: im-plications for the clinical microbiology laboratory. J Clin Microbiol
2001 ; 39:2206–12.
178. Lorente L, Jimenez A, Santana M, et al. Microorganisms responsible
for intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infection according to
the catheter site. Crit Care Med 2007 ; 35:2424–7.
179. Seifert H, Strate A, Pulverer G. Nosocomial bacteremia due to Aci-
netobacter baumannii. Clinical features, epidemiology, and predictors
of mortality. Medicine (Baltimore) 1995 ; 74:340–9.
180. Friedman ND, Korman TM, Fairley CK, Franklin JC, Spelman DW.
Bacteraemia due to Stenotrophomonas maltophilia : an analysis of 45
episodes. J Infect 2002 ; 45:47–53.
181. Li J, Nation RL, Turnidge JD, et al. Colistin: the re-emerging antibioticDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •43for multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacterial infections. Lancet In-
fect Dis 2006 ; 6:589–601.
182. Safdar N, Handelsman J, Maki DG. Does combination antimicrobial
therapy reduce mortality in gram-negative bacteraemia? A meta-anal-ysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2004 ; 4:519–27.
183. Elting LS, Bodey GP . Septicemia due to Xanthomonas species and
non-aeruginosa Pseudomonas species: increasing incidence of cathe-
ter-related infections. Medicine (Baltimore) 1990 ; 69:296–306.
184. Rex JH, Bennett JE, Sugar AM, et al. A randomized trial comparing
ﬂuconazole with amphotericin B for the treatment of candidemia inpatients without neutropenia. Candidemia Study Group and the Na-
tional Institute. N Engl J Med 1994 ; 331:1325–30.
185. Mora-Duarte J, Betts R, Rotstein C, et al. Comparison of caspofungin
and amphotericin B for invasive candidiasis. N Engl J Med 2002 ; 347:
2020–9.
186. Reboli AC, Rotstein C, Pappas PG, et al. Anidulafungin versus ﬂu-
conazole for invasive candidiasis. N Engl J Med 2007 ; 356:2472–82.
187. Kuse ER, Chetchotisakd P , da Cunha CA, et al. Micafungin versus
liposomal amphotericin B for candidaemia and invasive candidosis:
a phase III randomised double-blind trial. Lancet 2007 ; 369:1519–27.
188. Nguyen MH, Peacock JE Jr, Tanner DC, et al. Therapeutic approaches
in patients with candidemia. Evaluation in a multicenter, prospective,observational study. Arch Intern Med 1995 ; 155:2429–35.
189. Hung CC, Chen YC, Chang SC, Luh KT, Hsieh WC. Nosocomial
candidemia in a university hospital in Taiwan. J Formos Med Assoc1996 ; 95:19–28.
190. Rex JH, Bennett JE, Sugar AM, et al. Intravascular catheter exchange
and duration of candidemia. NIAID Mycoses Study Group and theCandidemia Study Group. Clin Infect Dis 1995 ; 21:994–6.
191. Karlowicz MG, Hashimoto LN, Kelly RE Jr, Buescher ES. Should
central venous catheters be removed as soon as candidemia is detected
in neonates? Pediatrics 2000 ; 106:E63.
192. Nucci M, Colombo AL, Silveira F, et al. Risk factors for death in
patients with candidemia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998 ;1 9 :
846–50.
193. Almirante B, Rodriguez D, Park BJ, et al. Epidemiology and predictors
of mortality in cases of Candida bloodstream infection: results from
population-based surveillance, barcelona, Spain, from 2002 to 2003.
J Clin Microbiol 2005 ; 43:1829–35.
194. Kuhn DM, George T, Chandra J, Mukherjee PK, Ghannoum MA.
Antifungal susceptibility of Candida bioﬁlms: unique efﬁcacy of am-
photericin B lipid formulations and echinocandins. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2002 ; 46:1773–80.
195. Schinabeck MK, Long LA, Hossain MA, et al. Rabbit model of Can-
dida albicans bioﬁlm infection: liposomal amphotericin B antifungal
lock therapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004 ; 48:1727–32.
196. Mukherjee PK, Mohamed S, Chandra J, et al. Alcohol dehydrogenase
restricts the ability of the pathogen Candida albicans to form a bioﬁlm
on catheter surfaces through an ethanol-based mechanism. Infect Im-mun 2006 ; 74:3804–16.
197. Raad I, Hanna H, Dvorak T, Chaiban G, Hachem R. Optimal anti-
microbial catheter lock solution, using different combinations of min-ocycline, EDTA, and 25-percent ethanol, rapidly eradicates organismsembedded in bioﬁlm. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007 ; 51:78–83.
198. Seifert H, Cornely O, Seggewiss K, et al. Bloodstream infection in
neutropenic cancer patients related to short-term nontunnelled cath-eters determined by quantitative blood cultures, differential time topositivity, and molecular epidemiological typing with pulsed-ﬁeld gelelectrophoresis. J Clin Microbiol 2003 ; 41:118–23.
199. Raad I, Hanna H, Maki DG. Intravascular-catheter-related infections:
advances in diagnosis, prevention and mangement. Lancet Infect Dis2007 ; 7:645–57.
200. Raad I, Hanna H, Boktour M, et al. Management of central venous
catheters in patients with cancer and candidemia. Clin Infect Dis2004 ; 38:1119–27.
201. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes D, et al. Clinical practice guidelinesfor the management of candidiasis: 2009 update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2009 ; 48:503–35.
202. Cotton DJ, Gill VJ, Marshall DJ, Gress J, Thaler M, Pizzo PA. Clinical
features and therapeutic interventions in 17 cases of Bacillus bacter-
emia in an immunosuppressed patient population. J Clin Microbiol1987 ; 25:672–4.
203. Peces R, Gago E, Tejada F, Laures AS, Alvarez-Grande J. Relapsing
bacteraemia due to Micrococcus luteus in a haemodialysis patient with
a Perm-Cath catheter. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997 ; 12:2428–9.
204. Oudiz RJ, Widlitz A, Beckmann XJ, et al. Micrococcus-associated
central venous catheter infection in patients with pulmonary arterialhypertension. Chest 2004 ; 126:90–4.
205. Maki DG, McCormick RD, Uman SJ, Wirtanen GW. Septic endar-
teritis due to intra-arterial catheters for cancer chemotherapy. I. Eval-uation of an outbreak. II. Risk factors, clinical features and manage-ment, III. Guidelines for prevention. Cancer 1979 ; 44:1228–40.
206. Khan EA, Correa AG, Baker CJ. Suppurative thrombophlebitis in
children: a ten-year experience. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1997 ; 16:63–7.
207. Verghese A, Widrich WC, Arbeit RD. Central venous septic throm-
bophlebitis: the role of medical therapy. Medicine (Baltimore) 1985 ;6 4 :
394–400.
208. Strinden WD, Helgerson RB, Maki DG. Candida septic thrombosis
of the great central veins associated with central catheters: clinicalfeatures and management. Ann Surg 1985 ; 202:653–8.
209. Kaufman J, Demas C, Stark K, Flancbaum L. Catheter-related septic
central venous thrombosis: current therapeutic options. West J Med1986 ; 145:200–3.
210. Falk PS, Scuderi PE, Sherertz RJ, Motsinger SM. Infected radial artery
pseudoaneurysms occurring after percutaneous cannulation. Chest1992 ; 101:490–5.
211. Torres-Rojas JR, Stratton CW, Sanders CV , et al. Candidal suppurative
peripheral thrombophlebitis. Ann Intern Med 1982 ; 96:431–5.
212. Fry DE, Fry RV , Borzotta AP . Nosocomial blood-borne infection sec-
ondary to intravascular devices. Am J Surg 1994 ; 167:268–72.
213. van Rooden CJ, Schippers EF, Barge RM, et al. Infectious compli-
cations of central venous catheters increase the risk of catheter-relatedthrombosis in hematology patients: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol2005 ; 23:2655–60.
214. Ghanem GA, Boktour M, Warneke C, et al. Catheter-related Staph-
ylococcus aureus bacteremia in cancer patients: high rate of compli-
cations with therapeutic implications. Medicine (Baltimore) 2007 ;8 6 :
54–60.
215. Raad I, Narro J, Khan A, Tarrand J, Vartivarian S, Bodey GP . Serious
complications of vascular catheter-related Staphylococcus aureus bac-
teremia in cancer patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1992 ; 11:
675–82.
216. Crowley AL, Peterson GE, Benjamin DK Jr, et al. Venous thrombo-
sis in patients with short- and long-term central venous catheter-as-sociated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Crit Care Med 2008 ;3 6 :
385–90.
217. Garrison RN, Richardson JD, Fry DE. Catheter-associated septic
thrombophlebitis. South Med J 1982 ; 75:917–9.
218. Walsh TJ, Bustamente CI, Vlahov D, Standiford HC. Candidal sup-
purative peripheral thrombophlebitis: recognition, prevention, and
management. Infect Control 1986 ; 7:16–22.
219. Gressianu MT, Dhruva VN, Arora RR, et al. Massive septic thrombus
formation on a superior vena cava indwelling catheter following Tor-
ulopsis (Candida) glabrata fungemia. Intensive Care Med 2002 ;2 8 :
379–80.
220. Falagas ME, Vardakas KZ, Athanasiou S. Intravenous heparin in com-
bination with antibiotics for the treatment of deep vein septic throm-bophlebitis: a systematic review. Eur J Pharmacol 2007 ; 557:93–8.
221. Lamas CC, Eykyn SJ. Hospital acquired native valve endocarditis:
analysis of 22 cases presenting over 11 years. Heart 1998 ; 79:442–7.
222. Fernandez-Guerrero ML, Verdejo C, Azofra J, de Gorgolas M. Hos-
pital-acquired infectious endocarditis not associated with cardiac sur-gery: an emerging problem. Clin Infect Dis 1995 ; 20:16–23.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

44•CID 2009:49 (1 July) •Mermel et al.223. Terpenning MS, Buggy BP , Kauffman CA. Hospital-acquired infective
endocarditis. Arch Intern Med 1988 ; 148:1601–3.
224. Eggimann P , Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet
JC, Pittet D. Impact of a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-
access care on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lan-cet2000 ; 355:1864–8.
225. Siegman-Igra Y, Anglim AM, Shapiro DE, Adal KA, Strain BA, Farr
BM. Diagnosis of vascular catheter-related bloodstream infection: ameta-analysis. J Clin Microbiol 1997 ; 35:928–36.
226. Fan ST, Teoh-Chan CH, Lau KF. Evaluation of central venous catheter
sepsis by differential quantitative blood culture. Eur J Clin MicrobiolInfect Dis 1989 ; 8:142–4.
227. Maki DG, Martin WT. Nationwide epidemic of septicemia caused by
contaminated infusion products. IV . Growth of microbial pathogensin ﬂuids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975 ; 131:267–72.
228. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Epidemiologic notes and
reports: nosocomial bacteremias associated with intravenous ﬂuid ther-apy—USA. 1971. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1997 ; 46:1227–33.
229. Garrett DO, McDonald LC, Wanderley A, et al. An outbreak of neo-
natal deaths in Brazil associated with contaminated intravenous ﬂuids.J Infect Dis 2002 ; 186:81–6.
230. Sunenshine RH, Tan ET, Terashita DM, et al. A multistate outbreak
ofSerratia marcescens bloodstream infection associated with contam-
inated intravenous magnesium sulfate from a compounding phar-macy. Clin Infect Dis 2007 ; 45:527–33.
231. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: delayed onset
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens bloodstream infections after exposure to con-
taminated heparin ﬂush—Michigan and South Dakota, 2005–2006.MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2006 ; 55:961–3.
232. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pseudomonas blood-
stream infections associated with a heparin/saline ﬂush—Missouri,New Y ork, Texas, and Michigan, 2004–2005. MMWR Morb MortalWkly Rep 2005 ; 54:269–72.
233. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: Yersinia enter-
ocolitica bacteremia and endotoxin shock associated with red blood
cell transfusions—United States, 1991. MMWR Morb Mortal WklyRep 1991 ; 40:176–8.
234. Tresoldi AT, Padoveze MC, Trabasso P , et al. Enterobacter cloacae sepsis
outbreak in a newborn unit caused by contaminated total parenteralnutrition solution. Am J Infect Control 2000 ; 28:258–61.
235. Dixon RE, Kaslow RA, Mackel DC, Fulkerson CC, Mallison GF. Aque-
ous quaternary ammonium antiseptics and disinfectants: use and mis-use. JAMA 1976 ; 236:2415–7.
236. Frank MJ, Schaffner W. Contaminated aqueous benzalkonium chlo-
ride: an unnecessary hospital infection hazard. JAMA 1976 ; 236:
2418–9.
237. Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens blood-
stream infections from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysiscenter. N Engl J Med 2001 ; 344:1491–7.
238. Macias AE, Munoz JM, Herrera LE, et al. Nosocomial pediatric bac-
teremia: the role of intravenous set contamination in developingcountries. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004 ; 25:226–30.
239. Richards C, Alonso-Echanove J, Caicedo Y, Jarvis WR. Klebsiella
pneumoniae bloodstream infections among neonates in a high-risk
nursery in Cali, Colombia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004 ;2 5 :
221–5.
240. Archibald LK, Ramos M, Arduino MJ, et al. Enterobacter cloacae and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa polymicrobial bloodstream infections traced
to extrinsic contamination of a dextrose multidose vial. J Pediatr
1998 ; 133:640–4.
241. Sardan YC, Zarakolu P , Altun B, et al. A cluster of nosocomial Kleb-
siella oxytoca bloodstream infections in a university hospital. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004 ; 25:878–82.
242. Prospero E, Barbadoro P , Savini S, Manso E, Annino I, D’Errico MM.
Cluster of Pseudomonas aeruginosa catheter-related bloodstream in-
fections traced to contaminated multidose heparinized saline solutionsin a medical ward. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2006 ; 209:553–6.243. Takahashi H, Kramer MH, Y asui Y, et al. Nosocomial Serratia mar-
cescens outbreak in Osaka, Japan, from 1999 to 2000. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2004 ; 25:156–61.
244. Enterobacter cloacae bloodstream infections associated with contam-
inated preﬁlled saline syringes—California, November 1998. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1998 ; 47:959–60.
245. Watson JT, Jones RC, Siston AM, et al. Outbreak of catheter-associ-
ated Klebsiella oxytoca and Enterobacter cloacae bloodstream infec-
tions in an oncology chemotherapy center. Arch Intern Med 2005 ;
165:2639–43.
246. Pan A, Dolcetti L, Barosi C, et al. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens
bloodstream infections associated with misuse of drug vials in a sur-gical ward. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2006 ; 27:79–82.
247. Perz JF, Craig AS, Stratton CW, Bodner SJ, Phillips WE Jr, Schaffner
W.Pseudomonas putida septicemia in a special care nursery due to
contaminated ﬂush solutions prepared in a hospital pharmacy. J ClinMicrobiol 2005 ; 43:5316–8.
248. Selenic D, Dodson DR, Jensen B, Arduino MJ, Panlilio A, Archibald
LK. Enterobacter cloacae bloodstream infections in pediatric patients
traced to a hospital pharmacy. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2003 ;6 0 :
1440–6.
249. Civen R, Vugia DJ, Alexander R, et al. Outbreak of Serratia marcescens
infections following injection of betamethasone compounded at acommunity pharmacy. Clin Infect Dis 2006 ; 43:831–7.
250. Siegman-Igra Y, Jacobi E, Lang R, Schwartz D, Carmeli Y. Unexpected
hospital-acquired bacteraemia in patients at low risk of bloodstreaminfection: the role of a heparin drip. J Hosp Infect 2005 ; 60:122–8.
251. Moreira BM, Leobons MB, Pellegrino FL, et al. Ralstonia pickettii and
Burkholderia cepacia complex bloodstream infections related to in-
fusion of contaminated water for injection. J Hosp Infect 2005 ; 60:
51–5.
252. Tanaka T, Takahashi H, Kobayashi JM, Ohyama T, Okabe N. A nos-
ocomial outbreak of febrile bloodstream infection caused by hepa-rinized-saline contaminated with Serratia marcescens, Tokyo, 2002.
Jpn J Infect Dis 2004 ; 57:189–92.
253. Nasser RM, Rahi AC, Haddad MF, Daoud Z, Irani-Hakime N, Almawi
WY. Outbreak of Burkholderia cepacia bacteremia traced to contam-
inated hospital water used for dilution of an alcohol skin antiseptic.Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004 ; 25:231–9.
254. Sebert ME, Manning ML, McGowan KL, Alpern ER, Bell LM. An
outbreak of Serratia marcescens bacteremia after general anesthesia.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002 ; 23:733–9.
255. Ostrowsky BE, Whitener C, Bredenberg HK, et al. Serratia marcescens
bacteremia traced to an infused narcotic. N Engl J Med 2002 ; 346:
1529–37.
256. American Academy of Pediatrics. In: Pickering LK, ed. Redbook: 2003
report on the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 26th ed. Elk GroveVillage, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003 .
257. Nelson JD. 2000 Pocketbook of pediatric antimicrobial therapy. 14th
ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2000 .
258. Chee L, Brown M, Sasadeusz J, MacGregor L, Grigg AP . Gram-neg-
ative organisms predominate in Hickman line-related infections in
non-neutropenic patients with hematological malignancies. J Infect
2008 ; 56:227–33.
259. Rodriguez-Creixems M, Alcala L, Munoz P , Cercenado E, Vicente T,
Bouza E. Bloodstream infections: evolution and trends in the micro-
biology workload, incidence, and etiology, 1985–2006. Medicine (Bal-
timore) 2008 ; 87:234–49.
260. Blot S, Janssens R, Claeys G, et al. Effect of ﬂuconazole consumption
on long-term trends in candidal ecology. J Antimicrob Chemother2006 ; 58:474–7.
261. Blue SR, Singh VR, Saubolle MA. Bacillus licheniformis bacteremia:
ﬁve cases associated with indwelling central venous catheters. ClinInfect Dis 1995 ; 20:629–33.
262. Ruhe J, Menon A, Mushatt D, Dejace P , Hasbun R. Non-epidermidis
coagulase-negative staphylococcal bacteremia: clinical predictors oftrue bacteremia. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2004 ; 23:495–8.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

IDSA Guidelines for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection •CID 2009:49 (1 July) •45263. Finkelstein R, Fusman R, Oren I, Kassis I, Hashman N. Clinical and
epidemiologic signiﬁcance of coagulase-negative staphylococci bac-
teremia in a tertiary care university Israeli hospital. Am J Infect Con-trol 2002 ; 30:21–5.
264. Ingram J, Weitzman S, Greenberg ML, Parkin P , Filler R. Compli-
cations of indwelling venous access lines in the pediatric hematologypatient: a prospective comparison of external venous catheters andsubcutaneous ports. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1991 ; 13:130–6.
265. Allon M, Daugirdas J, Depner TA, Greene T, Ornt D, Schwab SJ.
Effect of change in vascular access on patient mortality in hemodialy-sis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2006 ; 47:469–77.
266. Stryjewski ME, Szczech LA, Benjamin DK Jr, et al. Use of vancomycin
or ﬁrst-generation cephalosporins for the treatment of hemodialysis-dependent patients with methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus
bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis 2007 ; 44:190–6.
267. Benjamin DK Jr, Miller W, Garges H, et al. Bacteremia, central cath-
eters, and neonates: when to pull the line. Pediatrics 2001 ; 107:1272–6.
268. Bouza E, Burillo A, Munoz P . Empiric therapy for intravenous central
line infections and nosocomially-acquired acute bacterial endocarditis.Crit Care Clin 2008 ; 24:293–312, viii-ix.
269. Weinstein MP , Towns ML, Quartey SM, et al. The clinical signiﬁcance
of positive blood cultures in the 1990s: a prospective comprehensiveevaluation of the microbiology, epidemiology, and outcome of bac-teremia and fungemia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 1997 ; 24:584–602.
270. Chirinos JA, Garcia J, Alcaide ML, Toledo G, Baracco GJ, Lichtstein
DM. Septic thrombophlebitis: diagnosis and management. Am J Car-diovasc Drugs 2006 ; 6:9–14.
271. Garcia J, Aboujaoude R, Apuzzio J, Alvarez JR. Septic pelvic throm-
bophlebitis: diagnosis and management. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol2006 ; 2006:15614.
272. Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis:
diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications:a statement for healthcare professionals from the Committee on Rheu-matic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Car-diovascular Disease in the Y oung, and the Councils on Clinical Car-diology, Stroke, and Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, Ameri-can Heart Association: endorsed by the Infectious Diseases Society ofAmerica. Circulation 2005 ; 111:e394–434.
273. Chu VH, Bayer AS. Use of echocardiography in the diagnosis and
management of infective endocarditis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2007 ;9 :
283–90.
274. Vieira ML, Grinberg M, Pomerantzeff PM, Andrade JL, Mansur AJ.
Repeated echocardiographic examinations of patients with suspectedinfective endocarditis. Heart 2004 ; 90:1020–4.
275. Robinson JL, Tawﬁk G, Saxinger L, Stang L, Etches W, Lee B. Stability
of heparin and physical compatibility of heparin/antibiotic solutionsin concentrations appropriate for antibiotic lock therapy. J AntimicrobChemother 2005 ; 56:951–3.
276. Lee JY, Ko KS, Peck KR, Oh WS, Song JH. In vitro evaluation of the
antibiotic lock technique (ALT) for the treatment of catheter-relatedinfections caused by staphylococci. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006 ;
57:1110–5.
277. Vercaigne LM, Sitar DS, Penner SB, Bernstein K, Wang GQ, Bur-
czynski FJ. Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability com-bined with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy2000 ; 20:394–9.
278. Crnich CJ, Halfmann JA, Crone WC, Maki DG. The effects of pro-
longed ethanol exposure on the mechanical properties of polyurethaneand silicone catheters used for intravascular access. Infect ControlHosp Epidemiol 2005 ; 26:708–14.
279. Pediatric Lexi-Comp Drugs. Available at: http://www.lexi.com. Ac-
cessed 12 May 2009.
280. Benjamin DK Jr, Driscoll T, Seibel NL, et al. Safety and pharmaco-
kinetics of intravenous anidulafungin in children with neutropeniaat high risk for invasive fungal infections. Antimicrob Agents Che-mother 2006 ; 50:632–8.
281. 2008 Neofax: a manual of drugs used in neonatal care. 21st ed. Phy-
sician’s Desk Reference, 2008 .Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/49/1/1/369414 by Goteborgs Universitetsbibliotek Biomedicinska Biblioteket user on 06 April 2026

