Neurocrit Care (2025) 42:726–729
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12028-024-02171-3

LESSONS LEARNED

A Case of Guillain–Barré Syndrome
and Repurposing cEEG to Enable
Communication in Total Locked‑in Syndrome
Thomas J. Pisano*

and Joshua M. Levine

© 2024 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature and Neurocritical Care Society

The Case
On presentation, a 19-year-old male patient with a history of testicular torsion reported that earlier that day, he
rapidly developed numbness and tingling sequentially of
his right foot, right hand, left foot, and left hand. In the
emergency department, he had difficulty walking. A little
more than 2 weeks prior, the patient had a sore throat,
cough, and fatigue; other family members in his household also had similar symptoms. Noncontrast computed
tomography scans of the head and cervical spine were
unremarkable, and he was admitted to the hospital. He
rapidly developed profound quadriparesis. He was intubated for failure to protect his airway, aspiration, and
hypoxemia around 30 h after the first reported neurological symptoms. He developed aspiration pneumonia
shortly after. He was transferred to a university-based
hospital neurointensive care unit. Upon admission to the
neurointensive care unit, the patient was alert and could
follow commands with slight voluntary movement of
his toes and right thumb. There was bilateral ptosis and
decreased abduction. His limbs were flaccid, and deep
tendon reflexes were absent.
What Other Information Would you Want
to Obtain?
Further diagnostic steps included contrasted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of his neuroaxis (performed
given multiple cranial nerve involvement on examination), lumbar puncture, electromyography/nerve
conduction studies, and testing for antiganglioside antibodies. MRI of the brain and spine with contrast showed
*Correspondence: thomas.pisano@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

enhancement of multiple cranial nerves, including the
left oculomotor, right abducens, bilateral hypoglossal,
right spinal accessory nerves, and diffuse enhancement
of the spinal nerve roots and proximal cauda equina
(Fig. 1). A lumbar puncture approximately 36 h after
onset was significant for a mild elevation in the protein
level (47 mg/dL, normal 15–45 mg/dL) without pleocytosis (2 cells/µL). A presumptive diagnosis of Guillain–
Barré syndrome (GBS) was made. Electromyogram/nerve
conduction studies (EMG/NCS) on hospital day two
revealed severe primarily motor polyneuropathy with
some evidence of demyelination. Repeat EMG/NCS on
hospital day eight was consistent with fulminant demyelinating sensory-motor neuropathy. A repeat lumbar
puncture done 7 days after symptom onset was traumatic but revealed more significant albuminocytologic
dissociation even upon correction for the red blood cell
count (red blood cell count 2999 cells/µL, white blood
cell count 20 cells/µL, protein level 374 mg/dL). These
data and positive antiganglioside antibodies (anti-GM1
and anti-GD1b) corroborated the diagnosis of GBS. His
paralysis continued to ascend until he was able to move
only his right brow. The patient used his brow elevation
to communicate answers to yes/no questions with the
clinical team.

What is the Treatment for GBS?
Separate meta-analyses have shown benefit for the
use of both intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and
plasma exchange (PLEX) in GBS [1, 2]. Data suggest
that IVIg is at least as effective as PLEX and possibly
that IVIg is superior [3, 4] and has a safer side-effect
profile [5]. He was treated with a five-day course
of IVIg. Sixteen days later, given the severity and

727

Case Continued
Despite early treatment with a five-day course of IVIg
(2 g/kg total dose divided across five days) the patient’s
condition worsened, leading to complete loss of voluntary movement by hospital day five. Continuous electroencephalography (cEEG) surface electrodes were placed
over the forehead to amplify nonvisible facial muscle
activity (right brow muscles targeted because they were
the last to lose all visible movement). This facilitated
communication by allowing staff and family members to
visualize muscle activity in real-time on a cEEG screen.
This electrophysiologic communication interface allowed
the patient to communicate his level of pain, anxiety, and
other concerns despite being in a total locked-in syndrome [7]. Despite aggressive treatment, he remained
quadriplegic and dependent on mechanical ventilation by
hospital day 40, with only partial recovery of some cranial nerve function.

Fig. 1 Cranial nerve and cervical and thoracic nerve rootlet enhancement. Postcontrast T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
sequences reveal cranial nerve and cervical and thoracic nerve rootlet
enhancement. a Sagittal cervical T1 postcontrast MRI sequence with
cross-section lines corresponding to panels (b–d). b Cross-section
at approximately the pontomedullary junction with faint bilateral
cranial nerve enhancement. c and d, Cross-section at C5 (c) and C6
(d) demonstrating dorsal and ventral nerve rootlet enhancement
(arrows). e Sagittal thoracic T1 postcontrast MRI sequence with crosssection lines corresponding to panels (f, g). f and g, Cross-section
at T5 (f) and T11 (g) demonstrating dorsal and ventral nerve rootlet
enhancement (arrows)

progression of his GBS, he was also treated with PLEX.
However, combing PLEX with IVIg has not shown to
provide further benefit [4].
Steroids are not an effective option in GBS, as they
do not change disability after four weeks, nor do they
affect rates of death or disability at 1 year [6]. Despite
evidence that suggest steroids may be effective in
experimental animal models of autoimmune neuritis, there is some relatively low-quality evidence in
humans to suggest corticosteroids may actually delay
recovery [6]. It has been proposed that the benefits of
steroid-based immunosuppression are counteracted by
steroid inhibition of repair processes [6].

Use of cEEG for Communication
The patient was no longer able to communicate when
the last observable voluntary brow movement was lost.
An electrophysiologic communication interface was created using cEEG surface electrodes to amplify nonvisible
muscle activity (see Supplementary Material for specifications). Real-time muscle amplification peaks were
easily detected by medical staff and family members on
a live cEEG monitor. With minimal training, they used
a code in which two peaks indicated “yes” and one peak
indicated “no,” enabling the patient to communicate his
level of pain, anxiety, and shortness of breath, as well
as answer yes/no questions posed by the clinical team
(Fig. 2; Supplementary Video; see Supplementary Material for detailed method to implement this approach).
Family members noted it was “super easy” to learn to
use the electrophysiologic communication interface.
They were also appreciative of regaining some ability for
the patient to communicate, stating that “even though
there were no signs of life and he was not breathing
on his own, the fact that he could hear us and respond
meant he is alive.” This simple yet effective electrophysiologic communication interface provided a practical
approach to addressing communication challenges in
severely paralyzed individuals, thereby enhancing patient
autonomy and improving the quality of care. The patient
eventually regained enough function to nod and shake
his head, make some eye movements, open and close his
mouth, and shrug his shoulders prior to being discharged
to a ventilator-capable long-term acute care facility. The
patient was discharged from the facility; he is currently
ventilator-liberated and wheelchair-bound and, with
hand orthoses, is able to use a computer and feed himself.

728

Fig. 2 EEG enables communication by amplifying muscle artifacts. Screenshot from EEG tracing demonstrating forehead muscle signal amplification, enabling communication in a patient with total locked-in syndrome. a, b The patient was asked to raise their eyebrows three (a) and two
times (b). Discrete amplified frontalis muscle signal is observed in the frontal EEG leads (Fp2-F8, Fp1-F3, F3-C3, Fp2-F4). Arrows highlight example
amplification artifacts. AP bipolar montage shown; vertical and horizontal scale bars depict 140 µV and 1 s, respectively. A 60-Hz notch filter, a
1-Hz low-frequency filter, and a 70-Hz high-frequency filter were used. Sensitivity was set to 70 µV/mm, and a time base of 30 mm/s was used. AP,
anteroposterior; EEG, electroencephalography

Discussion
Here, we present a compelling case of a 19-year-old man
who presented to the emergency department with symptoms of GBS that were preceded by an upper respiratory
tract infection. Despite initial treatment with IVIg and
PLEX, the patient developed profound quadriparesis and
respiratory failure. Notably, the patient lost all voluntary
movement, becoming totally locked-in. cEEG was used
in a nontraditional way as an electrophysiologic communication interface to amplify forehead muscle electrographic signals to enable basic communication. Medical
staff and family members were easily able to detect realtime amplification peaks. This allowed them to rapidly begin asking the patient questions and deciphering
answers.
Many complex and more invasive ways have been
proposed to facilitate communication in lockedin patients [8, 9]. The approach is remarkably
simple: using surface EEG electrodes to amplify nonvisible muscle activity. In this case, we targeted the brow

region; however, a simple approach could be used for
alternative face or body muscles given different patient
circumstances (i.e., targeting muscles the patient last
lost control of ). This electrophysiologic communication interface enabled the patient to communicate his
level of pain, anxiety, and shortness of breath, as well as
answer yes/no questions posed by the clinical team. It
also helped rule out status epilepticus contributing to
his lack of responsiveness.
Use of cEEG in this context represents a novel
approach to improve the communication challenges
faced by severely paralyzed individuals [9]. By amplifying nonvisible muscle activity, this simple electrophysiologic communication interface enabled a patient to
communicate effectively with the clinical team, despite
being in a total locked-in syndrome. This straight-forward approach uses a technology accessible to most
intensive care units and can relatively easily enhance
patient autonomy and hospitalized quality of life.

729

Lessons Learned
1. Rapid progression and early diagnosis GBS can
quickly escalate from mild to severe symptoms,
emphasizing the necessity of early recognition and
comprehensive diagnostic steps, including MRI, lumbar puncture, and nerve conduction studies.
2. Effective treatment protocols IVIg and PLEX are the
primary treatments for GBS, with IVIg often preferred because of its safety profile. Steroids are not
effective and may delay recovery.
3. Communication in severe cases For patients who progressed to a total locked-in syndrome due to severe
GBS, cEEG can be used as an electrophysiologic
communication interface to amplify nonvisible muscle activity, enabling basic communication.
4. Accessibility and adaptability of cEEG cEEG is widely
available in intensive care units. Our approach can be
implemented without additional software, providing
a practical and adaptable solution to improve patient
autonomy and quality of care.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s12028-​024-​02171-3.
Author contributions
Patient care: JML. Conceptualization: TJP, JML. Writing–original draft: JML.
Writing—review and editing: TJP, JML. Generative AI was used for enhancing
manuscript clarity and improving grammar.
Source of Support
None to report.
Conflicts of Interest
There are no potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article.
Ethical Approval/Informed Consent
This study is in accordance with the principles of the Institutional Review
Board (IRB) of the University of Pennsylvania that a case report of three or less

cases does not require IRB approval (3.2.2). The patient consented for their
case to be published.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Received: 26 June 2024 Accepted: 22 October 2024
Published: 2 December 2024

References
1. Hughes RA, Swan AV, van Doorn PA. Intravenous immunoglobulin for
Guillain–Barré syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(9):
CD002063.
2. Chevret S, Hughes RA, Annane D. Plasma exchange for Guillain–Barré
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;2017(2): CD001798.
3. van der Meché FG, Schmitz PI, Dutch Guillain–Barré Study Group. A
randomized trial comparing intravenous immune globulin and plasma
exchange in Guillain–Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(17):1123–9.
4. Plasma Exchange/Sandoglobulin Guillain-Barré Syndrome Trial Group.
Randomised trial of plasma exchange, intravenous immunoglobulin, and combined treatments in Guillain–Barré syndrome. Lancet.
1997;349(9047):225–30.
5. Zaki HA, Iftikhar H, Najam M, Masood M, Al-Marri ND, Elgassim MA, et al.
Plasma exchange (PE) versus intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for the
treatment of Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) in patients with severe symptoms: a systematic review and meta-analysis. eNeurologicalSci. 2023;31:
100468.
6. Hughes RA, Brassington R, Gunn AA, van Doorn PA. Corticosteroids for
Guillain–Barré syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;2016(10):
CD001446.
7. Bauer G, Gerstenbrand F, Rumpl E. Varieties of the locked-in syndrome. J
Neurol. 1979;221(2):77–91.
8. Birbaumer N, Murguialday AR, Cohen L. Brain-computer interface in
paralysis. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008;21(6):634–8.
9. Canny E, Vansteensel MJ, van der Salm SM, Müller-Putz GR, Berezutskaya J.
Boosting brain-computer interfaces with functional electrical stimulation:
potential applications in people with locked-in syndrome. J Neuroeng
Rehabil. 2023;20(1):157.

