Intensive Care Med (2018) 44:742–759
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-018-5212-y
REVIEW
A state of the art review on optimal 
practices to prevent, recognize, and manage 
complications associated with intravascular 
devices in the critically ill
Jean‑François  Timsit1,2* , Mark  Rupp3,4, Emilio  Bouza5,6,7, Vineet  Chopra8, Tarja  Kärpänen9, Kevin  Laupland10, 
Thiago  Lisboa11,12, Leonard  Mermel13,14, Olivier  Mimoz15,16,17, Jean‑Jacques  Parienti18,19, Garyphalia  Poulakou20, 
Bertrand  Souweine21,22 and  Walter  Zingg23
© 2018 Springer ‑Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature and ESICM
Abstract  
Intravascular catheters are inserted into almost all critically ill patients. This review provides up ‑to‑date insight into 
available knowledge on epidemiology and diagnosis of complications of central vein and arterial catheters in ICU. It 
discusses the optimal therapy of catheter ‑related infections and thrombosis. Prevention of complications is a multi‑
disciplinary task that combines both improvement of the process of care and introduction of new technologies. We 
emphasize the main component of the prevention strategies that should be used in critical care and propose areas of 
future investigation in this field.
Keywords:  Intravascular catheter, Thrombosis, Pulmonary emboli, Sepsis, Critically ill
Introduction
Effective treatment of critically ill patients requires reli -
able vascular access in order to monitor patient status 
and deliver critically needed fluids, blood products, and 
medications. Unfortunately, mechanical, thrombotic, and 
infectious complications are not infrequent and result 
in substantial morbidity, mortality, and excess cost. This 
monograph offers expert advice on best practices regard -
ing the insertion and care of intravascular catheters. 
The panel was invited by the first author on the basis of 
their expertise in epidemiology diagnosis, prevention, 
and treatment of catheter-related bloodstream infection 
from all over the world. None of the experts declined the 
invitation. The first version of each section was written by three of the experts, and the text was reread and com -
mented on by all the experts for improvement and modi -
fication during two other rounds. No methodology was 
used to capture evidence in particular, except for relying 
on systematic reviews whenever possible.
Epidemiology of infectious and non‑infectious 
complications
Central venous catheters (CVC)
CVCs are frequently used in critical care with up to two-
thirds of patients admitted to French ICUs being exposed 
to at least one such device [ 1].
Jugular, subclavian, and femoral veins are the major 
insertion sites. Pneumothorax, hemothorax, arterial 
puncture, cardiac dysrhythmia, and hematoma as well 
as infection and thrombosis are complications directly 
related to catheter insertion. The incidence of mechanical 
complications is primarily related to the choice of inser -
tion site and number of punctures performed, which can 
*Correspondence:  Jean‑francois.timsit@aphp.fr 
1 Université Paris Diderot/Hopital Bichat ‑ Réanimation Medicale et des 
maladies infectieuses, Paris  75018, France
Full author information is available at the end of the article
743
be reduced by ultrasound (US) guidance. Mechanical 
complications are associated with significant morbidity and mortality with one study finding a nearly threefold increase in risk of death due to iatrogenic pneumotho
-
rax [2]. The occurrence of catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) can also be devastating, with a signifi
-
cant impact on mortality [3, 4] and costs [5].
Among patient factors, immunosuppression consist -
ently increases risk [1, 6]. The daily risk of catheter infec -
tions does not increase over time [7]. Consequently, the benefit of routinely replacing CVCs after a stipulated period of time to prevent catheter infection has not been observed. As the cumulative risk of infection increases with the number of days the CVC is in place, prompt removal of unnecessary CVCs is mandatory [7]. In fact, in the before–after quasi-experimental Michigan Key
-
stone Project, prompt CVC removal, together with hand hygiene, use of full-barrier CVC insertion precautions, skin disinfection with chlorhexidine, and avoidance of the femoral site decreased the incidence of central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI) from 7.7 at baseline to 1.4 per 1000 catheter-days [8].
The least studied CVC complication is thrombosis. 
Most of them are asymptomatic and occur despite the use of venous thromboprophylaxis [9]. A prospective observational study [10] found that the presence of pul
-
monary embolism in mechanically ventilated patients was associated with lower limb deep venous thrombosis in one-third of the cases. More than half of them were related to a femoral catheter. In this study, upper limb thrombosis associated with catheter insertion was not a risk factor for pulmonary emboli.
Peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs)
The use of PICCs has grown dramatically in critically ill patients [11, 12]. Compared to traditional CVCs, PICCs 
offer a number of advantages including (a) safer insertion via the upper extremity, thus avoiding pneumothorax; (b) convenient placement by nurse-led vascular access teams; and (c) clinical advantages in specific patients (e.g., those with coagulopathies, morbid obesity, head and neck inju
-
ries) where CVC placement is more challenging. How -
ever, like CVCs, PICCs are associated with risks [12]. As a result of their length and small diameter, PICCs are more prone to dislodgement, thrombophlebitis, and catheter malfunction compared to traditional CVCs [12, 13]. A 
systematic review of 62 studies found that the risk of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) among patients with PICCs was greatest for patients receiving PICCs in the ICU, aver
-
aging 13% in this subset [14]. When compared to CVCs, the risk of DVT was 2.5-fold higher (95% CI 1.54–4.32), likely due to insertion in smaller veins that are prone to venous stasis in hypercoagulable patients [14]. For these reasons, PICCs should not be used for short-term (< 15–20  days) catheterization in the ICU [15]. Initial 
findings of lower CRBSIs in PICCs were likely due to con
-
founding by original studies examining outcomes in out -
patient care, where indication and use are not comparable to inpatient care. A systematic review found no significant difference in rates of CRBSI between CVCs and PICCs in hospitalized (including critically ill) patients [16].
Hemodialysis catheters
About one-tenth of critically ill patients require a hemo -
dialysis catheter (HDC) for renal replacement therapy (RRT) [17]. Although HDCs are inserted in central veins, the epidemiology of their complications cannot be directly extrapolated from other CVCs because HDCs differ in design (dual-lumen catheter with larger diam
-
eter), purpose (dedicated to extracorporeal blood venous circulation for RRT), handling (frequent hub disconnec
-
tion and manipulation and locking between sessions), and insertion site (subclavian site discouraged to preserve the vascular network). A higher rate of placement failures and hematoma has been reported in jugular compared to femoral veins when using the landmark technique for HDC placement [18]. Rates of HDC-related coloniza
-
tion and CRBSI range from 9 to 28/1000  catheter-days [18–20] and 1–3/1000 catheter-days, respectively. While there is no difference of CRBSI between the femoral and the jugular insertion site, HDC colonization is reported to be higher at the femoral site in obese patients [18, 19]. The risk of DC colonization was demonstrated to be steady over time for intermittent hemodialysis [21, 22] 
but to increase sharply after 10 days for continuous RRT [21]. In two observational studies, the risk of HDC colo
-
nization for HDCs replaced for dysfunction did not differ between HDCs inserted by new puncture or exchanged over a guidewire [20, 23]. In a randomized study includ
-
ing a mixed ICU and non-ICU population, minocycline–rifampicin-coated HDCs failed to decrease the rate of colonization, but did reduce infection (0/66 versus 7/64 CRBSI in the treatment versus control arm, respectively) [24]. Studies on the efficacy of non-antibiotic antimicro
-
bial locks for preventing HDC infections have yielded conflicting results but differ by the types of lock solutions and duration of dwell time exposure [25–27].
The rates of asymptomatic and symptomatic HDC-asso
-
ciated DVT are approximately 16.5% and 0.5%, respectively, with no differences between femoral and jugular placement [18]. HDC dysfunction resulting in HDC replacement 
ranges from 10% [28] to 26% [27]. No difference between the right jugular and femoral sites (both of which outper
-
formed the left jugular site) was observed. Performance was lower at the femoral site compared to the jugular when for HDC < 24 cm or blood flow > 200 ml/min [28].
744
Arterial catheters
The complications of arterial cannulation (AC) include 
transient vascular occlusion, hematoma, hemorrhage, infection, pseudoaneurysm, air embolism, and neuro
-
logic injury [29]. Transient vascular occlusion may result from mechanical obstruction and subsequent thrombosis and occurred more frequently for radial access. Hema
-
toma formation occurs in approximately 6% of all femoral access attempts with 0.15% being life-threatening retrop
-
eritoneal hemorrhage. The risk of CRBSI associated with AC is comparable to the risk observed for CVCs [9, 30]. 
However, compared to CVCs, the daily risk increases with time for ACs after day 7. Risk is higher for femoral as compared to radial access [7]. Arterial line CRBSIs are associated with pseudoaneurysm, thromboarteritis, and arterial rupture. Iatrogenic pseudoaneurysms pre
-
dominately occur after cannulation, especially in the case of multiple access attempts and coagulopathy and may lead to severe complications such as pseudoaneurysm rupture, distal embolization, and compression neuropa
-
thy [ 29]. Mechanical complication risk is decreased by 
US-guided access. Limiting the duration of AC insertion also reduces the risk of arterial thrombi and infection occurrence.
Recent advances and ongoing controversies 
in diagnosis and treatment of vascular catheter‑related infection (Box 1)
Mechanisms of infection
Colonization of the catheter occurs via two main path -
ways: the extraluminal route and the intraluminal route. 
Colonization of short-term CVCs (< 15–20 days) occurs 
predominantly from the skin puncture site, whereas colo -
nization of long-term CVCs is usually related to intralu -
minal bacterial spread from a contaminated hub [31]. In both cases, the source of microorganisms is usually com
-
mensal skin flora or flora of another person who manipu -
lates the catheter without aseptic technique. Accordingly, coagulase-negative staphylococci are responsible for 40–50% of bloodstream infections, followed by S. aureus 
(10–20%). gram-negative bacilli, especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas sp., and Acinetobacter 
baumannii , are recovered in one-third of cases. Candida 
sp. are recovered in 3–10% of cases.
Biofilm formation on the inner and outer surfaces of 
the catheter contributes to the development of CRBSI [32]. A biofilm is a complex structure formed by bac
-
teria that have attached to an artificial surface or tissue [33]. Bacterial attachment to the catheter surface begins within 24 h after catheter insertion. The bacteria prolifer
-
ate and secrete a polysaccharide matrix, which provides a medium for the attachment of additional organisms. Formation of a biofilm is virtually inevitable but does not always lead to clinical manifestations of infection, prob
-
ably because the bacteria contained in the biofilm are characterized by slow growth and limited virulence. Bio
-
film-associated intravascular catheter infections are typi -
cally resistant to antimicrobials, not only because some antimicrobials cannot penetrate into the biofilm but also because the organisms are metabolically quiescent or slow growing. In addition, biofilms thwart host immune defense mechanisms.
The pathogenesis of catheter-associated fibrin sheath 
formation and thrombosis is poorly understood but bio
-
film formation is the first event. Subsequently, fibrin and other constituents, such as laminin, collagen, and even muscle cells, convert the film to a mature sheath [34]. Metallic cations, such as magnesium, calcium, and iron, stabilize the biofilm and contribute both to its develop
-
ment and bacterial growth [35]. Catheter thrombosis on the fibrin sheath may be facilitated by platelet activa
-
tion, decreased levels of protein C and antithrombin III, hyperfibrinogenemia, and homocysteine elevation [32].
Diagnosis of catheter‑related infections
The diagnostic methods that are currently accepted are summarized in Table  1. There are important differences 
between CRBSI and CLABSI that need to be understood in order to properly interpret available studies. To meet the definition of CRBSI, a positive peripheral blood cul
-
ture must match a blood culture drawn through the catheter hub or a microorganism grown from a catheter culture (e.g., catheter tip). However, to meet the CLABSI definition a positive peripheral blood culture is not required, nor is a positive catheter culture required. The definition can be met with only a positive blood culture drawn through a catheter hub. As such, this definition requires a single blood culture positive for a pathogen (or two cultures positive for a common commensal) not recovered from another site during the 3  days pre
-
ceding and 7  days following the detection of the index bacteremia. The CLABSI definition is adapted for sur
-
veillance and is not meant to be used as a clinical defini -
tion because of its lower specificity [36, 37]. Considerable 
variability therefore occurs among experts [38, 39] and 
hospitals [36] in the classification of CLABSI. In addi -
tion, this definition is influenced by the number of blood cultures performed before introducing new antimicro
-
bials and the number of non-blood cultures and other diagnostic tests performed to characterize infectious foci responsible for secondary BSI.
Fever is non-specific and erythema at the catheter 
entry site is present in less than half of the cases of CRBSI [40]. Usually, when CRBSI is suspected, the common practice in the ICU is to remove the CVC and to replace it at a new site. However, only about 15–25% of CVCs so 
745
Table 1 Definitions of infection‑related catheter complications
Definition Comments
Catheter tip colonization Catheter tip culture that yields ≥ 15 cfu/plate (semiquantita‑
tive),102 cfu/ml (quantitative sonication), or  103 cfu/ml (quantitative 
vortexing)Qualitative culture should no longer be used
Exit site infection Tenderness, erythema, or induration > 2 cm at catheter exit site; may 
be associated with other signs and symptoms of infection, such as 
fever or purulent drainage at exit site, with or without concomitant bloodstream infectionPositive culture of exudate confirms the exit site infection microbiologi‑
cally
NB: colonization without clinical signs does not define exit site infec‑
tion
Catheter ‑related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) One positive blood culture obtained from peripheral vein and clinical 
manifestation of infection and (1) catheter tip colonization or (2) a differential time to positivity of more than 120 min and no obvious source of bloodstream infection except the catheter or (3) simulta‑neous quantitative cultures of blood with a ratio of > 3:1 cfu/mL of 
blood (catheter vs. peripheral blood); NB: Quantitative culture of the catheter exit site reflects the extraluminal contamination. Its nega‑tive predictive value is higher than 99%Simultaneous quantitative culture from a peripheral vein and the 
catheter of > 3:1 ratio is rarely used
NB: Note that this definition differs from the definition of CLABSI used 
for infection‑ control surveillance activities
NB: the exclusion of other sources of infection results in important vari‑
ability in the final classification. Purulence at the catheter exit site is clear evidence indicating the catheter is the source of infection
Central line ‑associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI) One positive blood culture and clinical manifestation of infection in a 
patient with a catheter in place with no other source of bacteremia except the catheterEasy to use for surveillance purposes. However, risk of overestimation of 
BSI incidence due to catheter infection especially in ICU and in onco ‑
hematological patients (see [127])
Catheter ‑related clinical sepsis Clinical manifestation of infection that disappears within 48 h of 
catheter removal and a positive catheter tip culture and no other obvious treated source of infectionRepresents 30–50% of catheter ‑related infections with general mani‑
festations. Not easy to collect routinely but may need antimicrobial treatment (see text)
Catheter ‑related thrombophlebitis Clinical definition: induration or erythema, warmth, and pain or 
tenderness along the tract of a catheterized or recently catheter ‑
ized vein
Alternatively, imaging evidence of vascular thrombosis and clinical 
manifestations concordant with location of a catheterized or recently catheterized vein
Tunnel infection Tenderness, erythema, and/or induration further than 2 cm from the 
catheter exit site, along the subcutaneous tract of a tunneled cathe ‑
ter (e.g., Hickman or Broviac catheter), with or without concomitant bloodstream infection
Port infection Infected fluid in the subcutaneous pocket, the external surface, and/
or the catheter tip of a totally implanted intravascular device; often associated with tenderness, erythema, and/or induration over the pocket; spontaneous rupture and drainage, or necrosis of the over ‑
lying skin, with or without concomitant bloodstream infection
746
removed indeed proved infected upon quantitative cath -
eter tip culture [1, 27, 41–43].
Diagnostic tests performed after catheter removal
Qualitative broth culture has a high sensitivity but a very 
low specificity, and is unable to distinguish contamina -
tion from infection. Quantitative culture techniques have been developed and used to explore either the extra
-
luminal surface of the catheter (semiquantitative Maki roll-plate technique) or the extra- and intraluminal sur
-
faces via sonication or vortex wash [44–47]. Quantita -
tive culture techniques have not been proven to be more accurate than the semiquantitative roll-plate method for short-term CVCs [48–50]. The sensitivity of catheter cul
-
ture [51, 52] may be decreased by prior antimicrobials 
and this point should be kept in mind when interpreting negative or borderline culture results and emphasizes the need for diagnostic testing (blood and catheter cultures) before starting antimicrobials.
Diagnosis of CRBSI with catheter in place
Diagnostic techniques allowing an accurate diagnosis while keeping the catheter in place [53] are an attractive option for diagnosis unless CRBSI is suspected to be the cause of severe sepsis, in which case the catheter should be promptly removed [48].
Quantitative culture of  catheter exit site A negative 
quantitative culture of the catheter exit site in case of 
suspicion of infection almost always rules out the diag
-
nosis of CRBSI (NPV = 99.2%) and unnecessary catheter 
replacement ,but routine surveillance cultures are not helpful [54, 55].
Simultaneous blood cultures from  catheter and  periph
-
eral vein Simultaneous blood cultures, drawn through 
the catheter and a peripheral vein, without removal or 
exchange of the catheter, are an accurate means to diag -
nose CRBSI. Differential quantitative blood culture using the lysis centrifugation technique is cumbersome, rarely available, and is further limited by the lack of standardized cutoff points (published cutoffs vary from ≥ 3:1 to ≥ 8:1) 
[46]. The time to positivity of a blood culture is closely related to the bacterial concentration in the blood. There
-
fore, the differential time to positivity (DTTP) of hub-drawn blood culture as compared to peripherally drawn blood culture has been proposed as a means to diagnose CRBSI [ 56]. If a cutoff of 120 min is used, sensitivity, spec
-
ificity, PPV, and NPV are greater than 90% [56]. This tech -
nique theoretically only explores the intraluminal route of infection, but recent papers suggest that it can be used for both short-term and long-term CRBSI diagnosis [56–58]. Unfortunately, aspiration of blood for culture, drawn through the catheter lumen, is not possible in one-fourth of the cases primarily because of luminal occlusion [59]. Furthermore, each lumen may represent a source of infec
-
tion and it has been shown that the sampling of one out of three lumens of triple-lumen catheters misses 37% of CRBSI cases [60]. The 120-min cutoff may depend on the time of growth for specific etiologic agents. For example, the 120-min cutoff is less accurate for Candida sp. and S. aureus [61]. The accuracy of the technique is based on sampling the same amount of blood from both the cath
-
eter and peripherally.
Is systemic treatment necessary in patients 
with positive catheter tip culture but negative blood cultures?
A review of available trials showed that only 17% of 
patients with positive catheter cultures had CRBSI [62]. A positive catheter tip culture in the absence of a positive blood culture was associated with only a 1.3% incidence of subsequent BSI in one ICU [63]. Therefore, the con
-
sequence of a positive catheter culture without positive blood cultures in a non-symptomatic patient is a chal
-
lenge at the bedside.
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
guidelines [48] recommend that catheter tips should not be cultured routinely, but only upon removal for sus
-
pected CRBSI. However, in the ICU, where abnormal temperature is present in more than half of the patients at the time of catheter removal and two of the four SIRS criteria are present in about 90% of patients, most cath
-
eter tips end up being cultured [43, 64]. Finally, the pres -
ence of SIRS criteria or local signs was not predictive of subsequent infections in ICU cohorts studied [63, 65–
67]. Studies that have explored this topic are summarized in Table E1.
Other factors that may be considered for therapeutic 
decision
The decision of whether antibiotic treatment is initiated 
in the case of a positive catheter tip culture depends on the identified microorganism. The risk of BSI may be higher if S.  aureus or non-fermentative gram-negative bacilli are recovered from a catheter tip (see Table  E1). Other favorable factors are an immunocompromised sta
-
tus and thrombosis of the catheterized vein [68].
Duration of therapy is not known. A maximum of 
7 days is accepted by the expert panel. A reasonable diag -
nostic and therapeutic strategy is proposed in Fig. 1.
Treatment of catheter‑related bloodstream 
infections
Treatment of CRBSI usually involves initiation of empiric 
therapy prior to the availability of culture results with 
747
subsequent targeted treatment based on organism iden -
tification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing results. 
General principles include source control (removal of an infected catheter which in turn depends on pathogen and type of catheter) and administration of high dose (intra
-
venous) bactericidal agents with the narrowest spectrum possible. Duration of therapy is based on clinical features as well as the identified microorganism. Lock therapy and catheter salvage should not be proposed for ICU patients.
Empiric treatment
Empiric therapy (i.e., that initiated prior to availability of culture data) should be individualized to the patient’s characteristics, risk factors, and local epidemiology. CRBSIs are frequently due to gram-positive organ
-
isms and, accordingly, vancomycin is the cornerstone of the empiric regimen in settings with high prevalence of MRSA [1]. Empiric coverage for gram-negative organ
-
isms, particularly for P.  aeruginosa, should be based on clinical and epidemiological factors, such as severity of disease, known colonization or exposure to healthcare settings with increased probability of colonization, and neutropenia or hematologic malignancy [48]. In addi
-
tion, previous multidrug-resistant (MDR) gram-negative infection, critical illness, neutropenia, prior antibiotic therapy, or presence of a femoral catheter are recog
-
nized risk factors for MDR gram-negative infections [69]. Where patients are colonized with an MDR, the choice of the empiric treatment regimen should be based on previous susceptibility profiles. A carbapenem or a beta-lactam with beta-lactamase inhibitor with or without an aminoglycoside is generally recommended [70, 71].
Empiric coverage for candidemia should be considered 
if multiple sites are colonized with Candida spp. or for patients with bone marrow or organ transplants, hema
-
tologic malignancy, femoral catheterization, or when patients are receiving total parenteral nutrition or pro
-
longed administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics. Empiric treatment consists mainly of an echinocandin, whereas fluconazole may represent an option in set
-
tings without recovery of C. glabrata or C. krusei and in patients without exposure to fluconazole in the previous 3 months [48, 72]. The targeted treatment depends on the 
microorganisms recovered and is discussed in the elec
-
tronic supplement and summarized in Table 2.
Duration of treatment
The duration of treatment depends on several fac -
tors such as the pathogen, the type of the catheter, the host, and the presence of complications (Table  3). It is 
mostly based on experts’ opinions and old cohort stud
-
ies. No strong evidence exists to support the actual recommendations.Surveillanc eTreatmen tCNS S. aureus
2BC; PCT
US
Short tr eatmen tif no 
thrombos is
Long treatmen tif 
thrombos isor risk
factors*
(Echocardiography) Bloodculture sif riskfactors*Ebact
No treatment? Watchful
waiting and US  
examination if doubtCandid a
NF GNB
(Enterococci )
2BC; PCT, BD glugan
US examinatio n
Short tr eatment if thrombosis, if 
ECMO /CVVH, if transplant
In other cases watchful waiting
Short tr eatmen t= 3-5 day s
Long treatmen t= 10-14 days unles scomplications
Fig. 1 Proposed strategy in case of positive catheter tip culture without positive blood culture. CNS coagulase negative staphylococci, Ebact Entero -
bacteriaceae, NF GNB non‑fermentative gram‑negative bacilli, US ultrasound examination, BC blood cultures, BDG 1,3‑beta‑ d‑glucan, ECMO extra‑
corporeal membrane oxygenation, CVVH continuous veno ‑venous hemofiltration, PCT serum procalcitonin. Green boxes represent microorganisms 
for which the absence of therapy is reasonable most of the time. The risk of watchful waiting should be scrutinized for microorganism mentioned in 
the orange box. For S. aureus in red, the treatment is the most reasonable approach. *Risk factors: implantable devices or immunosuppression
748
Table 2 Proposed targeted therapy of CRBSI
Pathogen/clinical scenario Conditions and comments Duration of  treatmenta
Uncomplicated CRBSI
 General concept for gram‑negative bacilli Negative blood cultures following catheter 
removal or guidewire exchange
Antibiotic therapy choice based on in vitro sus‑
ceptibility, bactericidal mechanism, narrowest 
spectrum possible7–14 days
 General concept for gram‑positive cocci exclud‑
ing Staphylococcus aureusNegative follow‑up blood cultures following 
catheter removal or guidewire exchange
Antibiotic therapy choice based on in vitro sus‑
ceptibility, bactericidal mechanism, narrowest spectrum possible
No clinical evidence of complicated infection, risk 
factors for endocarditis, or hardware infection≤ 7 days for low virulence organisms and 
10–14 days otherwise
 Staphylococcus aureus Requires ALL of the following:Negative follow‑up blood cultures following 
catheter removal or guidewire exchange
Anti‑staphylococcal penicillin or first ‑generation 
cephalosporin for MSSA; vancomycin or dapto ‑
mycin for MRSA
If MRSA, MIC must be ≤ 1.0 g/L
Prompt response to institution of therapyNo indwelling devices (such as prosthetic heart 
valves or vascular grafts) are present
There is no clinical evidence of metastatic staphy‑
lococcal infection
Infective endocarditis has been excluded with 
echocardiography14 days
 Candida sp. Negative follow‑up blood cultures following 
catheter removal or guidewire exchange
Antifungal therapy with echinocandin or flucona‑
zole, choice based on in vitro susceptibility
Ophthalmologic exam negative for fungus if 
echinocandin to be used14 days
 All organisms if catheter removal is not possible Salvage treatment with antibiotic lock and sys‑
temic treatment
Low success rates; exceptionally used when 
catheter exchange/removal is not possible in patients without sepsis of shock4 weeks
(Enterococcus spp.) Shorter treatment may be applied for entero ‑
coccal CRBSIs in both the setting of catheter removal and salvage, if complicated infection is excluded
E. faecalis requires thorough investigation for 
complicated infection, similarly to S. aureus7–14 days
 Coagulase ‑negative staphylococci After catheter removal, in the absence of risk 
cardiac factors, short treatment is feasible5–7 days
10–14 days
Complicated CRBSI
 General concept all organisms Persistent bacteremia following catheter removal 
and receipt of effective antimicrobial therapy
Initiate search for complications (i.e., echocardio ‑
gram) and metastatic foci4–6 weeks
 General concept all organisms Complications related to bacteremia (i.e., sup ‑
purative thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, osteo ‑
myelitis, metastatic infection)4–6 weeks plus treatment adjusted to manage 
the complication
749
Essential preventive measures critical care 
specialists should offer (Box 2)
Although attention to catheter insertion and main -
tenance is of utmost importance in the prevention of 
CRBSI, it must be kept in mind that the only sure way to prevent CRBSI, as well as other catheter-related com
-
plications, is to avoid a catheter. An increasing body of literature indicates the safety of peripheral intravenous lines for low-dose, short-term vasopressor infusions. To this end, minimization of catheter use or alternatives are an important aspect of CRBSI prevention.
Optimal route for arterial and venous access
The femoral route for central venous access is considered contaminated and prone to thrombosis [73]. Although the subclavian site for vein access in ICU patients has proven superior with regard to infectious and thrombotic complications compared to femoral access in a rand
-
omized study [73], the subclavian site was associated with mechanical complications in 17% of patients [42, 73]. In 
a pragmatic multicenter, randomized trial of 2532 cen
-
tral venous catheterizations, subclavian, internal jugular, and femoral access routes have been compared for the risk of mechanical, thrombosis, and infectious complica
-
tions. This study showed that both internal jugular and femoral access increased the risk of CRBSI as compared with the subclavian site [42]. This study also showed that the time to intravascular complications differed between sites (p = 0.02), and the subclavian site proved safer than 
the jugular site [hazard ratio (HR) 2.5, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1–5.6)] or the femoral site (HR 3.1, 95% CI 1.4–7.1), particularly for dwell time > 5 days. The rate of 
complications was similar between internal jugular and femoral routes. Therefore, the optimal route for venous access depends of the expected duration of catheteriza
-
tion and the type of complication most concerning for an individual patient: immediate mechanical versus cumula
-
tive intravascular risks (Fig. 2).
Regarding arterial access, a meta-analysis of 59 obser -
vational studies [74] found that the risk of AC infection was higher for femoral site compared with radial site access (relative risk 1.93, 95% CI 1.32–2.84; p = 0.001).
Ultrasound for insertion
Systematic reviews have shown that the use of ultra -
sound, compared to anatomic landmarks, is associated with a 10–80% greater procedural success, lower number of attempts, shorter time to catheterize the vessel, and a 50% reduction of mechanical complications especially for internal jugular and subclavian access [75, 76]. Ultra
-
sound also allows for prompt recognition of complica -
tions [77], such as pneumothorax. Similarly, the use of ultrasound improves insertion success, reduces access time, and improves safety when placing PICCs [78], or arterial and peripheral venous catheters, particularly when difficult vascular access is anticipated.
Indeed, access to appropriate equipment is necessary 
[79]. A recent review of the literature and summary rec
-
ommendations suggests combining anatomic landmarks and ultrasound to improve safety. Online training for use of ultrasound, while growing, must be paired with real-time coaching in order to increase success and ensure adoption.
Cutaneous antisepsis
Skin antisepsis is one of the most important preven -
tive measures. Numerous studies have been con -
ducted to identify the best antiseptic solution for skin Table 2 continued
Pathogen/clinical scenario Conditions and comments Duration of  treatmenta
 Staphylococcus aureus Source control of metastatic complications (i.e., 
abscess drainage, tube thoracostomy, arthros‑
copy, surgical debridement)
MSSA anti‑staphylococcal penicillin or first ‑gen‑
eration cephalosporin (contraindicated if CNS involvement)
MRSA vancomycin (caution MIC ≥ 1.5 g/L) or 
daptomycin (caution lung involvement)
MRSA poor response to first ‑line therapy switch to 
ceftaroline or use combination therapies4–6 weeks plus treatment adjusted to manage 
the complication
 Candida sp. Endocarditis requires surgical evaluationCNS/eye involvement contraindicates echino ‑
candin; use amphotericin/5‑FU followed by fluconazole if susceptible4–6 weeks plus treatment adjusted to manage 
the complication
MRSA methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, MSSA methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, MIC minimum inhibitory concentration, CNS central nervous 
system
a Proposed duration of therapy referred to old cohort studies or experts’ recommendations. Shorter duration of therapy in case of uncomplicated bloodstream 
infections should be tested
750
Table 3 Elements of  bundle of  catheter care and  maintenance (adapted from  https ://www.joint  commi ssion .org/asset s/1/6/CLABS I_Toolk  it_Tool_3‑18_CVC_
Inser  tion_Bundl es.pdf )
Organization Insertion bundle elements Maintenance bundle elements
Michigan Keystone Intensive 
Care
Unit ProjectHand hygiene before catheter insertion
Use of full barrier precautions
Chlorhexidine skin preparation
Avoidance of the femoral vein for inserting CVCs (except in children)Prompt removal of CVCs
Institute for Healthcare 
Improvement
5 Million Lives CampaignHand hygieneMaximal barrier precautions upon insertionChlorhexidine skin antisepsis
Optimal catheter site selection, avoid femoral vein for CVC insertion in adults
Daily review of line necessity; prompt removal of unnecessary lines
Canadian Patient Safety 
Institute
Safer Healthcare Now!Hand hygiene
Maximal barrier precautions
Chlorhexidine skin antisepsisOptimal catheter type and site selection
In adults, subclavian vein insertion preferred; avoid femoral vein insertion
In children, insertion site choice individualizedDaily review of line necessity, with prompt removal of unnecessary lines
Aseptic lumen access
Catheter site and tubing care
United Kingdom Department 
of Health High Impact Intervention
Central venous catheter care 
bundleCatheter type Use single ‑lumen catheter unless otherwise indicated
 Use antimicrobial‑impregnated catheter if estimated duration of 1–3 weeks and high 
risk of catheter ‑related bloodstream infection
Insertion site Subclavian or internal jugular veinPersonal protective equipment
 Maximal sterile barriers during insertion (sterile gown, sterile gloves, large sterile drape)
 Eye and full body protectionSkin preparation 2% chlorhexidine gluconate in 70% isopropyl alcohol is used; allow to dry for at least 
30 s
Hand hygiene Hand hygiene before and after each episode of patient contact
Dressing
 Sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing Safe disposal of sharps
 Sharps are disposed of safely at the point of care
Documentation
 Document details of insertion in the medical recordHand hygiene
 Hand hygiene immediately before and after each episode of patient contact
Site inspection
 Insertion site inspected daily for signs of infection; record finding in medical record
Dressing
 Intact, dry, adherent transparent dressing is present Clean insertion site with 2% chlorhexidine gluconate in 70% isopropyl alcohol prior to 
dressing changes
Catheter injection ports Cover injection ports with caps or valved connectorsCatheter access
 Use aseptic technique to access the line
 Clean ports and hubs with 2% chlorhexidine gluconate in 70% isopropyl alcoholprior to accessing catheters
Administration set replacement
 Replace immediately after administration of blood or blood products Replace after 24 h after administration of lipid‑ containing total parenteral nutrition
 Replace within 72 h of all other fluid setsCatheter replacement
 Catheter is removed if no longer required or decision not to remove is recorded
Details of removal are documented in the medical record
Health Protection Scotland: 
Preventing infections when 
inserting and maintaining 
a CVCPerform surgical scrubUse maximal sterile barrier precautions (headwear, mask, sterile gown, and sterile gloves)
Apply a sterile body drape to the patient
Aseptic technique is maintained throughout catheter insertion
2% chlorhexidine in 70% isopropyl alcohol is used for insertion site skin preparation and 
allowed to dry before catheter insertion
Use the subclavian site is used if possible, or internal jugular vein; femoral vein insertion 
should be avoided whenever possible
Use a sterile transparent, semipermeable dressing Need for the CVC is reviewed and recorded on a daily basis
 CVC dressing is intact CVC dressing has been changed in the last 7 days
 2% chlorhexidine gluconate in 70% isopropyl alcohol is used for cleaning
insertion sites during dressing changesHand hygiene is performed immediately before accessing the line or site
Use an antiseptic containing 70% isopropyl alcohol for at least 15 s to clean the access 
hub prior to accessing
751
decontamination and their main findings can be summa -
rized as follows [6, 41, 80]: (1) application of sterile 2% 
(w/v) alcoholic chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) to decon -
taminate the skin prior to insertion of a vascular cath -
eter represents standard of care; (2) no cleansing of the 
skin with soap or detergent is necessary unless the skin is obviously contaminated; (3) neither aqueous nor alco
-
holic povidone–iodine should be used as a first-line agent for skin decontamination.
Adequate skin decontamination also requires correct 
application technique, including the dose for the skin sur
-
face area and allowing adequate drying time. The optimal modality of antiseptic application remains controversial [81]. Application of the antiseptic either using applicators or sterile gauze handled with a pincer may increase anti
-
septic diffusion into the deeper layers of skin while keep -
ing the hands of the operator away to reduce the risk of contamination. Single-use vials containing sterilized anti
-
septic further reduce the risk of contaminated solutions from multi-use bottles but may increase costs. Although CHG is the most effective disinfectant, it is associated with more cutaneous skin reactions [41, 82]. Although 
rare, severe allergy and anaphylaxis to CHG has also been reported. Given the widespread use of CHG in medicine, the development of CHG resistance and cross-resistance to clinically relevant antibiotics has become a concern. To date, decreased microbial susceptibility to CHG (tol
-
erance), measured with increased minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC), has been observed [83] and is pri
-
marily due to the presence of multidrug efflux pumps. However, the clinical impact of this is uncertain as the concentration of CHG in clinical use still far exceeds the MBC. However, CHG tolerance has been associated with MRSA decolonization protocol failure [84]. Ubiquitous use of CHG, including in body washes, oral care, and decontamination of medical devices, however, warrants closer monitoring for emergence of resistant strains to CHG and cross-resistance to antibiotics [85]. Developing 
the armamentarium of new effective antiseptics should therefore be a priority moving forwards.
Chlorhexidine bathing
A growing body of literature indicates that routine patient washing with chlorhexidine or universal decolo
-
nization protocols result in CLABSI reduction [86–88]. A recent meta-analysis of available randomized controlled trials (RCTs) suggests that the intervention is mainly active on gram-positive commensals [89].
Impregnated materials
A wide variety of antimicrobial-impregnated devices, designed to prevent CRBSI, have been introduced into clinical use, including impregnated CVCs, antimicrobial dressings, coated needleless connectors, and passive port protectors. The use of these devices should be proposed when a continuous quality improvement program failed to reach its objective [85].
CHG dressings
Both CHG-impregnated sponges and CHG-gel dressings are associated with a 60% decrease in the risk of arterial and central venous catheter infections including CRBSIs [43, 64]. CHG-containing dressings have demonstrated 
efficacy in reducing the risk of CRBSI in ICU patients [90], although these are associated with a 1% risk of con
-
tact dermatitis in adults.
Implementation of CHG dressings into clinical areas 
therefore needs to be considered, especially in adult patients when the risk of infection is high despite the use of appropriate bundles of catheter care.
Antimicrobial coated or impregnated CVCs
A meta-analysis of five RCTs evaluating CHG–silver sulfadiazine-impregnated catheters incorporated into Inser/g415on  
Success Mechanical *T hrombosi sI nfec/g415o n
Femoral
Jugular
Subclavian
*Risk of major mechanical co mplica/g415ons.  This risk is signiﬁcantly lower for ultrasound -guided jugular inser/g415on ( [75])
Good
Averag e
Poor  
Fig. 2 Specific advantages and attendant risks of each central venous site in the ICU. *Risk of major mechanical complications. This risk is signifi‑
cantly lower for ultrasound‑ guided jugular insertion [75]
752
both the internal and the external surfaces has shown 
to halve the risk of CRBSI [OR 0.51 (0.26–1.00)] [91]. However, this analysis found significant heterogeneity between studies. Catheters impregnated intraluminally and extraluminally with minocycline–rifampin reduce the risk or CRBSI as compared to polyurethane catheters and to externally coated chlorhexidine–silver sulfadia
-
zine-impregnated catheters (OR 0.23, 95% CI 0.14–0.40) [92]. Their use decreases the risk of CRBSI as compared to non-impregnated controls [5 studies in ICU, OR 0.26 (0.15–0.47)] [91]. However, many of the studies were performed in the era before infection preventive bun
-
dles were routine and whether impregnated catheters are cost-effective in such settings is not known. Although the emergence of antimicrobial resistance is of concern, par
-
ticularly with the minocycline–rifampin-coated catheter, this was not observed in controlled trials and in a large monocenter cohort (9200 CVCs/500,000 CVC days) [93]. Nevertheless, rifampin and minocycline are sometimes used as therapy in severe infections due to Acinetobac
-
ter baumannii  and MRSA and this should be considered 
when making institutional decisions regarding the intro -
duction of a coated or impregnated CVC.
Other catheters impregnated with Oligon, silver zeo -
lite, carbon, and platinum have been tested but have not proven their efficacy [91].
Catheter lock for preventing thrombotic and infectious 
complications
The antimicrobial lock therapy (ALT) consists in instill -
ing an antimicrobial solution into a catheter lumen for a 
certain period of time to achieve a high local antimicro -
bial concentration, thus overcoming sessile bacteria and fungi resistance and preventing or treating CRBSI. ALT is intended for catheters not used continuously and targets endoluminal catheter infections. Therefore, most avail
-
able data evaluating this strategy comes from long-term devices. In these patients, lock solutions with antibiotics (such as vancomycin or gentamicin) mixed in heparin to obtain antimicrobial–anticoagulant lock solutions can reduce long-term CRBSI [94] but may lead to the emer
-
gence of antibiotic-resistant organisms [95] and could lead to systemic toxicity due to lock solution spillage from catheters.
The use of fibrinolytics in lock solutions reduced tun
-
neled dialysis catheter infection and dysfunction [96]. Cationic chelator-based solutions combined with anti-infectious agents not used for parenteral administration have been successfully used for preventing long-term catheter infections. In contrast, lock solutions with cit
-
rate alone, taurolidine citrate, or concentrated etha -
nol have yielded conflicting results on their efficacy for CRBSI prevention or maintaining catheter patency [97–100].
The extrapolation of these studies to short-term cath
-
eters inserted in critically ill patients is questionable because of differences in catheter type, use, and accessi
-
bility for ALT. Studies on ALT in ICU patients are scarce and addressed mainly hemodialysis catheters, since their lumens are idle and available for ALT only between renal replacement therapy sessions [25–27]. The results of a large study comparing interdialytic lock with unfraction
-
ated heparin and 4% citrate are not yet available [101]. Today, the routine use of prophylactic ALT for short-term catheter cannot be recommended.
Relationship between thrombosis and infection
Some clinical data [68, 102] suggest a close relationship 
between catheter thrombosis and infection, especially in the superior vena caval territory [73, 103]. The diagnosis 
of catheter thrombosis should therefore increase suspi
-
cion for catheter-related infection.
Thrombosis risk is particularly pronounced for PICCs 
as they often migrate from the cavoatrial junction [104] and are inserted into smaller veins.
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic agents have been 
used to prevent and manage thrombotic complications of central venous catheters. Several RCTs conducted in ICU patients have yielded conflicting results on the impact of heparin flushing to maintain line patency and there is insufficient evidence to recommend this practice [105]. There is a lack of clinical trial data to support the specific use of systemic anticoagulant therapy to prevent cathe
-
ter-related thrombosis in critically ill adults. Although an individualized risk–benefit evaluation is required, patients with cancer, inherited or acquired thrombo
-
philia, or recurrent thrombosis of unknown etiology may benefit from systemic anticoagulation to prevent cathe
-
ter-related complications [106]. It is not uncommon for catheter lumens to become occluded. Where not con
-
traindicated (e.g., infection), the use of fibrinolytic thera -
pies can safely restore patency with associated reduction in cost [107, 108].
Essential components of bundles of care
Insertion and maintenance bundles have been developed to prevent microbial colonization of central venous cath
-
eters, thereby mitigating risk of CRBSI. Implementation of such bundles has been demonstrated to reduce the incidence of CLABSI by 52% (95% CI 32–66%) on the basis of high-quality studies [109]. Examples of some bundles are noted in Table  3. Although nearly half of 
US ICUs reported having a CLABSI prevention bun
-
dle policy in a 2011 paper, only 38% of institutions that monitored bundle implementation reported full bundle 
753
compliance [110]. Monitoring adherence to the process 
of care is key in obtaining positive results from bundle implementation. Importantly, the full impact and sus
-
tainability of bundles at the institutional level can only be achieved once a safety culture is adopted by the organiza
-
tion [111, 112].
Role of nursing care
The IV catheter care bundle includes a best practice checklist for catheter insertion, appropriate post-inser
-
tion catheter care, and prompt removal of the catheter when no longer required for patient care [113–115]. Nursing staff have an important role during these pro
-
cesses, but any personnel involved with the care of intra -
vascular catheters should be trained and competent. The checklist is a tool to ensure the catheter insertion proce
-
dure is followed correctly, and it empowers healthcare workers to challenge and halt the procedure if this is not followed correctly. Appropriate post-insertion catheter care includes the following [116]: maintain a clean and dry catheter site and ensure that the dressing is intact; cleanse the skin with an antiseptic agent and allow it to dry when the dressing is replaced; unless clinically indi
-
cated, replace sterile, transparent, semipermeable poly -
urethane dressings every 7  days [43] or daily if a gauze and tape dressing is used because of bleeding or excessive perspiration. Frequent dressing disruption may increase the risk of catheter-related infections over 12-fold in comparison to CVC without disruptions, especially with CVC inserted into jugular femoral veins [117]. Aseptic technique should be utilized when accessing or manip
-
ulating the catheter. Access devices or ports and infu -
sion sets should be replaced as per local guidelines and manufacturers’ instructions. Although needle-free access devices may reduce the risk of infection, compliance with appropriate cleaning of these access devices is of para
-
mount importance in reducing the risk of infection.
Knowledge, education, behavioral interventions: what is 
useful?
The most important intervention that reduced the inci -
dence of CLABSI in the past decade was practice change 
[118]. The adoption of best practice strategies reduced CLABSI rates by more than 50%. Education and training are at the heart of any behavior change strategy. How
-
ever, rather than the evidence base, individual experi -
ence and personal perceptions are the main drivers for practice [119]. Thus, isolated knowledge delivery by ex cathedra teaching or handing out written protocols is not sufficient to change behavior. A systematic review on organization and structure of infection control identi
-
fied three key components addressing knowledge, educa -
tion, and behavioral interventions directly or indirectly: (1) education and training involves frontline staff and is team- and task-oriented; (2) guidelines should be used in combination with practical education and training; and (3) implementation follows a multimodal strategy, including tools such as bundles and checklists, developed by multidisciplinary teams, taking into account local con
-
ditions [109, 120]. Behavioral change interventions pass 
within an organizational culture [121]. Multimodal strat -
egies improve the likelihood of implementation success because they take into account the local context. A mul
-
timodal strategy is the combination of best practice pro -
cedures and technology, promoted by different “modes” such as lectures, visual cues, simulations, bedside train
-
ing, knowledge tests, or other imaginative ideas to raise interest and awareness of healthcare professionals aimed at changing behavior. Education and training should be both hands-on at the bedside and by use of skills labora
-
tories. Training should be a peer-to-peer action; involv -
ing frontline staff in the process of planning improves acceptance and allows healthcare professionals to iden
-
tify with a behavioral change program.
Bundles per se are not multimodal strategies but mne -
monic milestones in complex procedures, originally established as an implementation tool. Bundled and non-bundled strategies were both effective in CLABSI reduction in a recent systematic review [122]. However, defining memorizable and measurable milestones help in the planning, execution, and evaluation of behavioral change interventions [118, 123, 124].
Unanswered questions and roadmap for future 
investigations
Pathophysiology–epidemiology
  –Not only infectious but also non-infectious complica -
tions may lead to severe adverse events. Large multi -
center epidemiological studies exploring the risks of 
infectious and non-infectious complications and their severity in ICU patients are lacking.
  –It is also important to develop outcome indicators combining infectious and non-infectious complica
-
tions of catheters in ICU.
  –More research is needed to understand thrombosis formation, the dynamics of catheter tip colonization and the interplay between them, during the course of central venous catheterization. Specific predictive markers of catheter thrombosis should also be devel
-
oped and tested.
Diagnostic strategies
  –The value of early diagnostic techniques aimed to avoid unnecessary catheter removal should be investigated.
754
  –The utility of molecular techniques in the diagnosis 
of CRBSI is not known and requires careful investiga -
tions.
Therapeutic strategies
  –The benefit of an antibiotic therapy in patients with positive catheter culture without blood culture should be investigated (especially for non-staphylococcal iso
-
lates).
  –The optimized duration of therapy for low virulence organisms following catheter removal is not known either in CRBSI or clinical sepsis. Comparison between very short antimicrobial therapy (1 dose in 48–72  h) versus 7–10  days is needed. Short- and long-term strategies should integrate both the nature of the microorganism and the underlying conditions.
  –The balance between benefits and risks of anticoagu
-
lant therapy in case of asymptomatic catheter throm -
bosis should be studied in further interventional trials.
Prevention and nursing care
  –Is routine insertion of CVC indicated in patients with low dose of vasopressor and adequate peripheral IV access?
  –The role of PICCs compared to CVC in ICU patients requires further study and should combine infectious and non-infectious complications including thrombo
-
sis and infections. The respective advantages of femo -
ral versus radial arterial catheters in terms of both infectious and non-infectious complications remain limited and require further interventional trials.
  –Adequate securement of the catheter is important in preventing mechanical and infectious complications. Although sutures are widely used for intravascular catheter securement, suture colonization may increase the risk of infection. The appropriate securement of intravascular catheters in critically ill patients requires further evidence.
  –Alcoholic 2% (w/v) CHG is currently recommended for skin antisepsis; the ideal concentration as well as the concentration of alcohol in the antiseptic solu
-
tion requires further evidence. For example, although high concentration of alcohol has a rapid antimicrobial action and drying time may be clinically appropriate, lower concentration of alcohol may improve the skin permeation of the antiseptic agent. The value of suc
-
cessive application of povidone–iodine and chlorhex -
idine has been suggested [125, 126] in clinical studies 
and requires further investigation.
  –New antiseptic solutions should be tested.
  –The benefit of CHG dressings to prevent infection for hemodialysis and ECMO catheters needs to be tested in clinical trials.  –The added value of antimicrobial-coated catheters in the context of low CRBSI rates should be evaluated.
  –The use of needle-free access devices or use of open ports/hubs to access intravascular catheters requires further evidence, taking into account the compliance with the appropriate decontamination of these access points. Furthermore, the method of cleaning is open for debate, whether alcohol alone or with another anti
-
septic agent is required and the delivery method of the antiseptic agent to achieve the best efficacy.
  –There is a lack of clinical trial data to support the spe
-
cific use of systemic anticoagulant therapies or throm -
bolytics to prevent catheter-related thrombosis in criti -
cally ill adults.
Box 1: Key messages for diagnosis and treatment 
of catheter‑related complications in critically ill 
patients
Mechanical complications including malfunction, occlu -
sion, and thrombosis are more frequent than infectious 
complications.
Ultrasound guidance should always be used for insert -
ing internal jugular catheters.
Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) is 
a clinical definition that should be clearly differenti -
ated from central line-associated bloodstream infec -
tion (CLABSI) which is mainly used for epidemiological purposes.
Empiric antimicrobial treatment of CRBSI should tar
-
get S.  aureus. Empiric therapy while awaiting culture 
confirmation for other etiologies should be based on clin -
ical variables, patients risk factors, and previous coloni -
zation status.
Catheter removal is the main therapeutic intervention 
and always recommended, especially in the case of sepsis or shock.
Treatment of patients with clinical sepsis and with a 
positive catheter tip culture but without positive blood culture may be beneficial when S.  aureus is recovered, and to a lesser extent for gram-negative non-fermentative bacteria. Data are insufficient to recommend treatment of other etiologies in this case.
The duration of antimicrobial therapy of uncompli
-
cated CRBSI is controversial and, depending on the causative pathogen, may not need to exceed 7–10  days following catheter removal.
Positive blood culture after 72  h of therapy indicates 
complicated CRBSI. Endocarditis and thrombophlebitis are the most common causes of failure. S. aureus CRBSI requires a high index of suspicion for endocarditis and metastatic infections.
Symptomatic catheter thrombosis requires catheter 
removal and anticoagulant therapy. Appropriate therapy 
755
of asymptomatic catheter thrombosis in critically ill 
patients is undefined.
Box 2: Key elements of prevention 
of catheter‑related infection
Hand hygiene.
Strict aseptic surgical condition at catheter insertion.
Preferential use of subclavian venous and radial arterial 
insertion sites.
Avoidance of insertion and immediate removal of 
unnecessary catheters.
Immediate replacement of soiled, moistened, or 
detached catheter dressings.
Use of alcoholic 2% chlorhexidine gluconate for skin 
antisepsis and catheter care.
Institution of a continuous quality improvement 
program.
Audit and feedback of the process of care, infection 
rates, and periodic re-education of providers.
The use of CHG-impregnated dressings or antimicro -
bial-impregnated catheters should be limited to situa -
tions where a continuous quality improvement program failed.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0013 4‑018‑5212‑ y) 
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Author details
1 Université Paris Diderot/Hopital Bichat ‑ Réanimation Medicale et des mala‑
dies infectieuses, Paris 75018, France. 2 UMR 1137 ‑ IAME Team 5 – DeSCID: 
Decision Sciences in Infectious Diseases, Control and care Inserm/Univ Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75018 Paris, France. 3 Division of Infectious 
Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. 4 Depart ‑
ment of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Nebraska Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA. 
5 Medicine Department, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid (UCM), Madrid, Spain. 6 Department of Clinical Microbiology 
and Infectious Diseases, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. 
7 Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, 
Spain. 8 Division of Hospital Medicine, Department of Medicine, Patient 
Safety Enhancement Program and Center for Clinical Management Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
9 Department of Clinical 
Microbiology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Mindelsohn Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2GW, UK. 
10 Department of Medicine, Royal Inland Hospital, Kamloops, BC V2C 2T1, 
Canada. 11 Rede Institucional de Pesquisa e Inovação em Medicina Intensiva, 
Complexo Hospitalar Santa Casa de Misericordia de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil. 
12 Critical Care Department and Infection Control Committee, Hospital 
de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil. 13 Department of Medicine, 
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, USA. 
14 Division of Infectious Diseases and Department of Epidemiology 
and Infection Control, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, USA. 15 Service 
des Urgences‑SAMU 86, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France. 16 Université de 
Poitiers, UFR de Médecine Pharmacie, Poitiers, France. 17 INSERM U1070, 
Pharmacologie des Agents antiInfectieux, Poitiers, France. 18 Department 
of Biostatistics and Clinical Research, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU), Caen, France. 
19 INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche Scientifique 1075 COMETE 
(N.T.) and EA4655 Risques Microbiens, Caen, France. 20 4th Department 
of Internal Medicine, Attikon University General Hospital, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. 
21 Service de Réanimation Médicale, 
Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, CHU de Clermont ‑Ferrand, BP 69, 63003 Cler ‑
mont‑Ferrand, Cedex 1, France. 22 Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, LMGE, 63000 Clermont‑Ferrand, France. 23 Infection Control Program and WHO 
Collaborating Centre for Patient Safety, University of Geneva Hospitals, 4 rue Gabrielle Perret‑Gentil, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland. 
Compliance with ethical standardsConflicts of interest
Dr. Chopra discloses receiving grant support from the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research and honoraria for research talks as a visiting professor. Dr. Kärpänen has received honoraria to present at a symposium and attend an international conference supported by 3M. Since contributing to the manuscript, she has taken a Senior Clinical Research Specialist role at 3M Deutschland GmbH. Dr. Mermel has served as a consultant for Marvao Medical and Nobio. Dr. Mimoz received grant support from 3M and Carefusion‑BD and honoraria for giving lectures from 3M and Carefusion‑BD. Dr. Timsit received grant support from 3M and honoraria for giving lectures from 3M.
Received: 4 April 2018   Accepted: 5 May 2018
Published online: 12 May 2018
References
 1. Timsit JF, L’Heriteau F, Lepape A, Francais A, Ruckly S, Venier AG, Jarno P , Boussat S, Coignard B, Savey A (2012) A multicentre analysis of catheter ‑
related infection based on a hierarchical model. Intensive Care Med 38(10):1662–1672
 2. de Lassence A, Timsit JF, Tafflet M, Azoulay E, Jamali S, Vincent F, Cohen Y, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, Alberti C, Dreyfuss D (2006) Pneumothorax in 
the intensive care unit: incidence, risk factors, and outcome. Anesthesi‑ology 104(1):5–13
 3. Siempos II, Kopterides P , Tsangaris I, Dimopoulou I, Armaganidis AE (2009) Impact of catheter ‑related bloodstream infections on 
the mortality of critically ill patients: a meta‑analysis. Crit Care Med 37(7):2283–2289
 4. Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S (1999) Attribut ‑
able morbidity and mortality of catheter ‑related septicemia in critically 
ill patients: a matched, risk ‑adjusted, cohort study. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 20(6):396–401
 5. Nuckols TK, Keeler E, Morton SC, Anderson L, Doyle B, Booth M, Shanman R, Grein J, Shekelle P (2016) Economic evaluation of quality improvement interventions for bloodstream infections related to cen‑tral catheters: a systematic review. JAMA InternMed 176(12):1843–1854
 6. Pages J, Hazera P , Megarbane B, du Cheyron D, Thuong M, Dutheil JJ, Valette X, Fournel F, Mermel LA, Mira JP et al (2016) Comparison of alcoholic chlorhexidine and povidone ‑iodine cutaneous antiseptics 
for the prevention of central venous catheter ‑related infection: a 
cohort and quasi‑ experimental multicenter study. Intensive Care Med 
42(9):1418–1426
 7. Lucet JC, Boudama L, Zahar JR, Schwebel C, Geffory A, Pease S, Herault MC, Haouache H, Adrie C, Thuong M et al (2010) Infectious risk associ‑ated with arterial catheters compared to central venous catheters. Crit Care Med 38(4):552–559
 8. Pronovost P , Needham D, Berenholtz S, Sinopoli D, Chu H, Cosgrove S, Sexton B, Hyzy R, Welsh R, Roth G et al (2006) An intervention to decrease catheter ‑related bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J 
Med 355(26):2725–2732
 9. Calvino ‑Gunther S, Schwebel C, Hamidfar ‑Roy R, Bonadona A, Lugosi 
M, Ara‑Somohano C, Minet C, Potton L, Cartier JC, Vesin A et al (2016) Complications of intravascular catheters in ICU: definitions, incidence and severity. A randomized controlled trial comparing usual transpar ‑
ent dressings versus new‑ generation dressings (the advanced study). 
Intensive Care Med 42(11):1753–1765
 10. Minet C, Lugosi M, Savoye PY, Menez C, Ruckly S, Bonadona A, Schwebel C, Hamidfar ‑Roy R, Dumanoir P , Ara‑Somohano C et al (2012) 
Pulmonary embolism in mechanically ventilated patients requiring computed tomography: prevalence, risk factors, and outcome. Crit Care Med 40(12):3202–3208
756
 11. Fletcher JJ, Wilson TJ, Rajajee V, Stetler WR Jr, Jacobs TL, Sheehan KM, 
Brown DL (2016) A randomized trial of central venous catheter type and thrombosis in critically ill neurologic patients. Neurocrit Care 25(1):20–28
 12. Chopra V, Priya A, Pekow PS, Thompson R, Flanders SA, Lindenauer PK (2016) Variation in prevalence and patterns of peripherally inserted central catheter use in adults hospitalized with pneumonia. J Hosp Med 11(8):568–575
 13. Pikwer A, Akeson J, Lindgren S (2012) Complications associated with peripheral or central routes for central venous cannulation. Anaesthesia 67(1):65–71
 14. Chopra V, Anand S, Hickner A, Buist M, Rogers MA, Saint S, Flanders SA (2013) Risk of venous thromboembolism associated with peripher ‑
ally inserted central catheters: a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Lancet 382(9889):311–325
 15. Chopra V, Flanders SA, Saint S, Woller SC, O’Grady NP , Safdar N, Tre ‑
rotola SO, Saran R, Moureau N, Wiseman S et al (2015) The Michigan appropriateness guide for intravenous catheters (MAGIC): results from a multispecialty panel using the RAND/UCLA appropriateness method. Ann Intern Med 163(6 Suppl):S1–S40
 16. Chopra V, O’Horo JC, Rogers MA, Maki DG, Safdar N (2013) The risk of bloodstream infection associated with peripherally inserted central catheters compared with central venous catheters in adults: a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 34(9):908–918
 17. Truche AS, Darmon M, Bailly S, Clec’h C, Dupuis C, Misset B, Azoulay E, Schwebel C, Bouadma L, Kallel H et al (2016) Continuous renal replacement therapy versus intermittent hemodialysis in intensive care patients: impact on mortality and renal recovery. Intensive Care Med 42(9):1408–1417
 18. Parienti JJ, Thirion M, Megarbane B, Souweine B, Ouchikhe A, Polito A, Forel JM, Marque S, Misset B, Airapetian N et al (2008) Femoral versus jugular venous catheterization and risk of nosocomial events in adults requiring acute renal replacement therapy: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 299(20):2413–2422
 19. Souweine B, Liotier J, Heng AE, Isnard M, Ackoundou‑N’Guessan C, Deteix P , Traore O (2006) Catheter colonization in acute renal failure patients: comparison of central venous and dialysis catheters. Am J Kidney Dis 47(5):879–887
 20. Chua HR, Schneider AG, Sherry NL, Lotfy N, Chan MJ, Galtieri J, Wong GR, Lipcsey M, Matte Cde A, Collins A et al (2014) Initial and extended use of femoral versus nonfemoral double ‑lumen vascular catheters 
and catheter ‑related infection during continuous renal replacement 
therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 64(6):909–917
 21. Parienti JJ, Dugue AE, Daurel C, Mira JP , Megarbane B, Mermel LA, Daubin C, du Cheyron D (2010) Continuous renal replacement therapy may increase the risk of catheter infection. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 5(8):1489–1496
 22. Souweine B, Traore O, Aublet ‑Cuvelier B, Badrikian L, Bret L, Sirot J, 
Gazuy N, Laveran H, Deteix P (1999) Dialysis and central venous cath‑eter infections in critically ill patients: results of a prospective study. Crit Care Med 27(11):2394–2398
 23. Coupez E, Timsit JF, Ruckly S, Schwebel C, Gruson D, Canet E, Klouche K, Argaud L, Bohe J, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M et al (2016) Guidewire exchange 
versus new site placement for temporary dialysis catheter insertion in ICU patients: is there a greater risk of colonization or dysfunction? Crit Care 20(1):230
 24. Chatzinikolaou I, Finkel K, Hanna H, Boktour M, Foringer J, Ho T, Raad I (2003) Antibiotic‑ coated hemodialysis catheters for the prevention of 
vascular catheter ‑related infections: a prospective, randomized study. 
Am J Med 115(5):352–357
 25. Hermite L, Quenot JP , Nadji A, Barbar SD, Charles PE, Hamet M, Jacquiot N, Ghiringhelli F, Freysz M (2012) Sodium citrate versus saline catheter locks for non‑tunneled hemodialysis central venous catheters in critically ill adults: a randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 38(2):279–285
 26. Parienti JJ, Deryckere S, Megarbane B, Valette X, Seguin A, Sauneuf B, Mira JP , Souweine B, Cattoir V, Daubin C et al (2014) Quasi‑ experimental 
study of sodium citrate locks and the risk of acute hemodialysis cathe ‑
ter infection among critically ill patients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 58(10):5666–5672 27. Souweine B, Lautrette A, Gruson D, Canet E, Klouche K, Argaud L, Bohe J, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, Mariat C, Vincent F et al (2015) Ethanol lock and 
risk of hemodialysis catheter infection in critically ill patients. A rand‑omized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 191(9):1024–1032
 28. Parienti JJ, Megarbane B, Fischer MO, Lautrette A, Gazui N, Marin N, Hanouz JL, Ramakers M, Daubin C, Mira JP et al (2010) Catheter dysfunction and dialysis performance according to vascular access among 736 critically ill adults requiring renal replacement therapy: a randomized controlled study. Crit Care Med 38(4):1118–1125
 29. Simon EM, Summers SM (2017) Vascular access complications: an emergency medicine approach. Emerg Med Clin N Am 35(4):771–788
 30. Traore O, Liotier J, Souweine B (2005) Prospective study of arterial and central venous catheter colonization and of arterial‑ and central venous catheter ‑related bacteremia in intensive care units. Crit Care Med 
33(6):1276–1280
 31. Mermel LA (2011) What is the predominant source of intravascular catheter infections? Clin Infect Dis 52(2):211–212
 32. Beloin C, Fernandez‑Hidalgo N, Lebeaux D (2017) Understanding bio ‑
film formation in intravascular device ‑related infections. Intensive Care 
Med 43(3):443–446
 33. Flemming HC, Wingender J, Szewzyk U, Steinberg P , Rice SA, Kjelleberg S (2016) Biofilms: an emergent form of bacterial life. Nat Rev Microbiol 14(9):563–575
 34. Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP (1999) Bacterial biofilms: a common cause of persistent infections. Science 284(5418):1318–1322
 35. Raad II, Fang X, Keutgen XM, Jiang Y, Sherertz R, Hachem R (2008) The role of chelators in preventing biofilm formation and catheter ‑related 
bloodstream infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 21(4):385–392
 36. Lin MY, Hota B, Khan YM, Woeltje KF, Borlawsky TB, Doherty JA, Steven‑son KB, Weinstein RA, Trick WE (2010) Quality of traditional surveillance for public reporting of nosocomial bloodstream infection rates. JAMA 304(18):2035–2041
 37. Timsit JF, Lugosi M, Minet C, Schwebel C (2011) Should we still need to systematically perform catheter culture in the intensive care unit? Crit Care Med 39:1556–1558
 38. Shuman EK, Washer LL, Arndt JL, Zalewski CA, Hyzy RC, Napolitano LM, Chenoweth CE (2010) Analysis of central line ‑associated bloodstream 
infections in the intensive care unit after implementation of central line bundles. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 31(5):551–553
 39. Worth LJ, Brett J, Bull AL, McBryde ES, Russo PL, Richards MJ (2009) Impact of revising the national nosocomial infection surveillance system definition for catheter ‑related bloodstream infection in ICU: 
reproducibility of the National Healthcare Safety Network case defini‑tion in an Australian cohort of infection control professionals. Am J Infect Control 37(8):643–648
 40. Safdar N, Maki DG (2002) Inflammation at the insertion site is not predictive of catheter ‑related bloodstream infection with short ‑term, 
noncuffed central venous catheters. Crit Care Med 30(12):2632–2635
 41. Mimoz O, Lucet JC, Kerforne T, Pascal J, Souweine B, Goudet V, Mercat A, Bouadma L, Lasocki S, Alfandari S et al (2015) Skin antisepsis with chlorhexidine ‑alcohol versus povidone iodine ‑alcohol, with and 
without skin scrubbing, for prevention of intravascular ‑catheter ‑related 
infection (CLEAN): an open‑label, multicentre, randomised, controlled, two‑by‑two factorial trial. Lancet 386(10008):2069–2077
 42. Parienti JJ, Mongardon N, Megarbane B, Mira JP , Kalfon P , Gros A, Marque S, Thuong M, Pottier V, Ramakers M et al (2015) Intravascular complications of central venous catheterization by insertion site. N Engl J Med 373(13):1220–1229
 43. Timsit JF, Schwebel C, Bouadma L, Geffroy A, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, 
Pease S, Herault MC, Haouache H, Calvino ‑Gunther S, Gestin B et al 
(2009) Chlorhexidine ‑impregnated sponges and less frequent dressing 
changes for prevention of catheter ‑related infections in critically ill 
adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 301(12):1231–1241
 44. Sherertz RJ, Raad II, Belani A, Koo LC, Rand KH, Pickett DL, Straub SA, Fauerbach LL (1990) Three ‑year experience with sonicated vascular 
catheter cultures in a clinical microbiology laboratory. J Clin Microbiol 28(1):76–82
 45. Maki DG, Weise CE, Sarafin HW (1977) A semiquantitative culture method for identifying intravenous‑ catheter ‑related infection. N Engl J 
Med 296(23):1305–1309
757
 46. Safdar N, Fine JP , Maki DG (2005) Meta‑analysis: methods for diagnosing 
intravascular device ‑related bloodstream infection. Ann Intern Med 
142(6):451–466
 47. Brun‑Buisson C, Abrouk F, Legrand P , Huet Y, Larabi S, Rapin M (1987) Diagnosis of central venous catheter ‑related sepsis. Critical level of 
quantitative tip cultures. Arch Intern Med 147(5):873–877
 48. Mermel LA, Allon M, Bouza E, Craven DE, Flynn P , O’Grady NP , Raad II, Rijnders BJ, Sherertz RJ, Warren DK (2009) Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of intravascular catheter ‑related 
infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 49(1):1–45
 49. Bouza E, Sousa D, Rodriguez‑ Creixems M, Lechuz JG, Munoz P (2007) Is 
the volume of blood cultured still a significant factor in the diagnosis of bloodstream infections? J Clin Microbiol 45(9):2765–2769
 50. Slobbe L, El Barzouhi A, Boersma E, Rijnders BJ (2009) Comparison of the roll plate method to the sonication method to diagnose catheter colonization and bacteremia in patients with long‑term tunnelled cath‑eters: a randomized prospective study. J Clin Microbiol 47(4):885–888
 51. Souweine B, Heng AE, Aumeran C, Thiolliere F, Gazuy N, Deteix P , Traore O (2008) Do antibiotics administered at the time of central venous catheter removal interfere with the evaluation of colonization? Inten‑sive Care Med 34(2):286–291
 52. Vandecasteele SJ, Van Eldere J, Merckx R, Peetermans WE (2004) The effect of systemic antibiotics on the microbiological diagnosis of experimental foreign body infections caused by Staphylococcus epider -
midis. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 48(2):89–95
 53. Rijnders BJ, Peetermans WE, Verwaest C, Wilmer A, Van Wijngaerden E (2004) Watchful waiting versus immediate catheter removal in ICU patients with suspected catheter ‑related infection: a randomized trial. 
Intensive Care Med 30(6):1073–1080
 54. Bouza E, Munoz P , Burillo A, Lopez‑Rodriguez J, Fernandez‑Perez C, Perez MJ, Rincon C (2005) The challenge of anticipating catheter tip colonization in major heart surgery patients in the intensive care unit: are surface cultures useful? Crit Care Med 33(9):1953–1960
 55. Fernandez‑ Cruz A, Martin‑Rabadan P , Suarez‑Salas M, Rojas‑ Wettig L, 
Perez MJ, Guinea J, Guembe M, Pelaez T, Sanchez‑ Carrillo C, Bouza E 
(2014) Is it feasible to diagnose catheter ‑related candidemia without 
catheter withdrawal? Med Mycol 52(5):491–497
 56. Blot F, Nitenberg G, Chachaty E, Raynard B, Germann N, Antoun S, Laplanche A, Brun‑Buisson C, Tancrede C (1999) Diagnosis of catheter ‑related bacteraemia: a prospective comparison of the time 
to positivity of hub ‑blood versus peripheral‑blood cultures. Lancet 
354(9184):1071–1077
 57. Raad I, Hanna HA, Alakech B, Chatzinikolaou I, Johnson MM, Tarrand J (2004) Differential time to positivity: a useful method for diagnosing catheter ‑related bloodstream infections. Ann Intern Med 140(1):18–25
 58. Bouza E, Alvarado N, Alcala L, Sanchez‑ Conde M, Perez MJ, Munoz 
P , Martin‑Rabadan P , Rodriguez‑ Creixems M (2005) A prospective, 
randomized, and comparative study of 3 different methods for the diagnosis of intravascular catheter colonization. Clin Infect Dis 40(8):1096–1100
 59. Catton JA, Dobbins BM, Kite P , Wood JM, Eastwood K, Sugden S, Sandoe JA, Burke D, McMahon MJ, Wilcox MH (2005) In situ diagnosis of intravascular catheter ‑related bloodstream infection: a comparison 
of quantitative culture, differential time to positivity, and endoluminal brushing. Crit Care Med 33(4):787–791
 60. Guembe M, Rodriguez‑ Creixems M, Sanchez‑ Carrillo C, Perez‑Parra 
A, Martin‑Rabadan P , Bouza E (2010) How many lumens should be cultured in the conservative diagnosis of catheter ‑related bloodstream 
infections? Clin Infect Dis 50(12):1575–1579
 61. Bouza E, Martin‑Rabadan P , Echenagusia A, Camunez F, Rodriguez‑Rosales G, Simo G, Echenagusia M, Guembe M (2014) Diagnosis of venous access port colonization requires cultures from multiple sites: should guidelines be amended? Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 78(2):162–167
 62. Rijnders BJ, Van Wijngaerden E, Peetermans WE (2002) Catheter ‑tip 
colonization as a surrogate end point in clinical studies on catheter ‑
related bloodstream infection: how strong is the evidence? Clin Infect Dis 35(9):1053–1058
 63. Mrozec N, Lautrette A, Aumeran C, Laurichesse H, Forestier C, Traore O, Souweine B (2011) Bloodstream infection following positive catheter cultures, what are the risks in the ICU when catheters are routinely cultured upon removal? Crit Care Med 39(6):1301–1305
 64. Timsit JF, Mimoz O, Mourvillier B, Souweine B, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, 
Alfandari S, Plantefeve G, Bronchard R, Troche G, Gauzit R et al (2012) Randomized controlled trial of chlorhexidine dressing and highly adhesive dressing for preventing catheter ‑related infections in critically 
ill adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 186(12):1272–1278
 65. Zafar U, Riederer K, Khatib R, Szpunar S, Sharma M (2009) Relevance of isolating Staphylococcus aureus from intravascular catheters without positive blood culture. J Hosp Infect 71(2):193–195
 66. Ruhe JJ, Menon A (2006) Clinical significance of isolated Staphylococ-cus aureus central venous catheter tip cultures. Clin Microbiol Infect 12(9):933–936
 67. Ekkelenkamp MB, van der Bruggen T, van de Vijver DA, Wolfs TF, Bonten MJ (2008) Bacteremic complications of intravascular catheters colo ‑
nized with Staphylococcus aureus. Clin Infect Dis 46(1):114–118
 68. Timsit JF, Farkas JC, Boyer JM, Martin JB, Misset B, Renaud B, Carlet J (1998) Central vein catheter ‑related thrombosis in intensive care 
patients: incidence, risks factors, and relationship with catheter ‑related 
sepsis. Chest 114(1):207–213
 69. Akova M, Daikos GL, Tzouvelekis L, Carmeli Y (2012) Interventional strat ‑
egies and current clinical experience with carbapenemase ‑producing 
gram‑negative bacteria. Clin Microbiol Infect 18(5):439–448
 70. Lorente L, Jimenez A, Santana M, Iribarren JL, Jimenez JJ, Martin MM, Mora ML (2007) Microorganisms responsible for intravascular catheter ‑
related bloodstream infection according to the catheter site. Crit Care Med 35(10):2424–2427
 71. Safdar N, Handelsman J, Maki DG (2004) Does combination antimicro ‑
bial therapy reduce mortality in gram‑negative bacteraemia? A meta‑analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 4(8):519–527
 72. Cornely OA, Bassetti M, Calandra T, Garbino J, Kullberg BJ, Lortholary O, Meersseman W, Akova M, Arendrup MC, Arikan‑Akdagli S et al (2012) ESCMID guideline for the diagnosis and management of Candida diseases 2012: non‑neutropenic adult patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 18(Suppl 7):19–37
 73. Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, Lefrant JY, Raffy B, Barre E, Rigaud JP , Casciani D, Misset B, Bosquet C et al (2001) Complications of femoral and subclavian venous catheterization in critically ill patients: a rand‑omized controlled trial. JAMA 286(6):700–707
 74. O’Horo JC, Maki DG, Krupp AE, Safdar N (2014) Arterial catheters as a source of bloodstream infection: a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Crit Care Med 42(6):1334–1339
 75. Brass P , Hellmich M, Kolodziej L, Schick G, Smith AF (2015) Ultrasound guidance versus anatomical landmarks for internal jugular vein cath‑eterization. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD006962
 76. Brass P , Hellmich M, Kolodziej L, Schick G, Smith AF (2015) Ultrasound guidance versus anatomical landmarks for subclavian or femoral vein catheterization. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD011447
 77. Milling TJ Jr, Rose J, Briggs WM, Birkhahn R, Gaeta TJ, Bove JJ, Melniker LA (2005) Randomized, controlled clinical trial of point ‑of‑care limited 
ultrasonography assistance of central venous cannulation: the third sonography outcomes assessment program (SOAP ‑3) trial. Crit Care 
Med 33(8):1764–1769
 78. Li J, Fan YY, Xin MZ, Yan J, Hu W, Huang WH, Lin XL, Qin HY (2014) A randomised, controlled trial comparing the long‑term effects of periph‑erally inserted central catheter placement in chemotherapy patients using B‑mode ultrasound with modified Seldinger technique versus blind puncture. Eur J Oncol Nurs 18(1):94–103
 79. Soni NJ, Reyes LF, Keyt H, Arango A, Gelfond JA, Peters JI, Levine SM, Adams SG, Restrepo MI (2016) Use of ultrasound guidance for central venous catheterization: a national survey of intensivists and hospitalists. J Crit Care 36:277–283
 80. Mimoz O, Chopra V, Timsit JF (2016) What’s new in catheter ‑related 
infection: skin cleansing and skin antisepsis. Intensive Care Med 42(11):1784–1786
 81. Casey AL, Badia JM, Higgins A, Korndorffer J, Mantyh C, Mimoz O, Moro M (2017) Skin antisepsis: it’s not only what you use, it’s the way that you use it. J Hosp Infect 96(3):221–222
 82. Mimoz O, Chopra V, Widmer A (2016) What’s new in skin antisepsis for short ‑term intravascular catheters: new data to address old problems? 
Intensive Care Med 42(12):2043–2045
758
 83. Wang JT, Sheng WH, Wang JL, Chen D, Chen ML, Chen YC, Chang SC 
(2008) Longitudinal analysis of chlorhexidine susceptibilities of noso ‑
comial methicillin‑resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates at a teaching hospital in Taiwan. J Antimicrob Chemother 62(3):514–517
 84. Lee AS, Macedo ‑Vinas M, Francois P , Renzi G, Schrenzel J, Vernaz N, 
Pittet D, Harbarth S (2011) Impact of combined low‑level mupirocin and genotypic chlorhexidine resistance on persistent methicillin‑resistant Staphylococcus aureus carriage after decolonization therapy: a case ‑control study. Clin Infect Dis 52(12):1422–1430
 85. Bouadma L, Karpanen T, Elliott T (2018) Chlorhexidine use in adult patients on ICU. Intensive Care Med. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0013 4‑018‑5137‑5
 86. Climo MW, Yokoe DS, Warren DK, Perl TM, Bolon M, Herwaldt LA, Wein‑stein RA, Sepkowitz KA, Jernigan JA, Sanogo K et al (2013) Effect of daily chlorhexidine bathing on hospital‑acquired infection. N Engl J Med 368(6):533–542
 87. Huang SS, Septimus E, Kleinman K, Moody J, Hickok J, Avery TR, Lankiewicz J, Gombosev A, Terpstra L, Hartford F et al (2013) Targeted versus universal decolonization to prevent ICU infection. N Engl J Med 368(24):2255–2265
 88. Milstone AM, Elward A, Song X, Zerr DM, Orscheln R, Speck K, Obeng D, Reich NG, Coffin SE, Perl TM (2013) Daily chlorhexidine bathing to reduce bacteraemia in critically ill children: a multicentre, cluster ‑
randomised, crossover trial. Lancet 381(9872):1099–1106
 89. Afonso E, Blot K, Blot S (2016) Prevention of hospital‑acquired blood‑stream infections through chlorhexidine gluconate ‑impregnated 
washcloth bathing in intensive care units: a systematic review and meta‑analysis of randomised crossover trials. Euro Surveill. https ://doi.org/10.2807/1560‑7917.ES.2016.21.46.30400 
 90. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017 updated recommen‑dations on the use of chlorhexidine ‑impregnated dressings for preven‑
tion of intravascular catheter ‑related infections. https ://www.cdc.gov/
infec  tionc ontro l/guide lines /pdf/bsi/c‑i‑ dress ings‑H.pdf . Accessed 10 
May 2018
 91. Hockenhull JC, Dwan KM, Smith GW, Gamble CL, Boland A, Walley TJ, Dickson RC (2009) The clinical effectiveness of central venous catheters treated with anti‑infective agents in preventing catheter ‑related blood‑
stream infections: a systematic review. Crit Care Med 37(2):702–712
 92. Falagas ME, Fragoulis K, Bliziotis IA, Chatzinikolaou I (2007) Rifampicin‑impregnated central venous catheters: a meta‑analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Antimicrob Chemother 59(3):359–369
 93. Ramos ER, Reitzel R, Jiang Y, Hachem RY, Chaftari AM, Chemaly RF, Hackett B, Pravinkumar SE, Nates J, Tarrand JJ et al (2011) Clinical effec‑tiveness and risk of emerging resistance associated with prolonged use of antibiotic‑impregnated catheters: more than 0.5 million catheter days and 7 years of clinical experience. Crit Care Med. https ://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013 e3181 feb83 e
 94. Zacharioudakis IM, Zervou FN, Arvanitis M, Ziakas PD, Mermel LA, Mylonakis E (2014) Antimicrobial lock solutions as a method to prevent central line ‑associated bloodstream infections: a meta‑analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Clin Infect Dis 59(12):1741–1749
 95. Landry DL, Braden GL, Gobeille SL, Haessler SD, Vaidya CK, Sweet SJ (2010) Emergence of gentamicin‑resistant bacteremia in hemodialysis patients receiving gentamicin lock catheter prophylaxis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 5(10):1799–1804
 96. Hemmelgarn BR, Manns BJ, Soroka SD, Levin A, MacRae J, Tennankore K, Wilson JS, Weaver RG, Ravani P , Quinn RR et al (2018) Effectiveness and cost of weekly recombinant tissue plasminogen activator hemodi‑alysis catheter locking solution. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. https ://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.08510 817
 97. Longo R, Llorens M, Goetz C, Platini C, Eid N, Sellies J, Ouamara N, Que ‑
tin P (2017) Taurolidine/citrate lock therapy for primary prevention of catheter ‑related infections in cancer patients: results of a prospective, 
randomized, phase IV trial (ATAPAC). Oncology 93(2):99–105
 98. Zhao Y, Li Z, Zhang L, Yang J, Yang Y, Tang Y, Fu P (2014) Citrate versus heparin lock for hemodialysis catheters: a systematic review and meta‑analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Kidney Dis 63(3):479–490
 99. Correa Barcellos F, Nunes BP , Valle LJ, Lopes T, Orlando B, Scherer C, Nunes M, Araujo Duarte G, Bohlke M (2017) Comparative effective ‑
ness of 30% trisodium citrate and heparin lock solution in preventing infection and dysfunction of hemodialysis catheters: a randomized controlled trial (CITRIM trial). Infection 45(2):139–145
 100. Tribler S, Brandt CF, Petersen AH, Petersen JH, Fuglsang KA, Staun M, Broebech P , Moser CE, Jeppesen PB (2017) Taurolidine ‑citrate ‑heparin 
lock reduces catheter ‑related bloodstream infections in intestinal 
failure patients dependent on home parenteral support: a randomized, placebo ‑controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 106(3):839–848
 101. Bruyere R, Soudry‑Faure A, Capellier G, Binquet C, Nadji A, Torner S, Blasco G, Yannaraki M, Barbar SD, Quenot JP (2014) Comparison of hep ‑
arin to citrate as a catheter locking solution for non‑tunneled central venous hemodialysis catheters in patients requiring renal replacement therapy for acute renal failure (VERROU‑REA study): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 15:449
 102. Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP (1994) The relationship between the thrombotic and infectious complications of central venous catheters. JAMA 271(13):1014–1016
 103. Timsit JF, Bruneel F, Cheval C, Mamzer MF, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, Wolff M, 
Misset B, Chevret S, Regnier B, Carlet J (1999) Use of tunneled femoral catheters to prevent catheter ‑related infection. A randomized, con‑
trolled trial. Ann Intern Med 130(9):729–735
 104. Chopra V, Kaatz S, Conlon A, Paje D, Grant PJ, Rogers MAM, Bernstein SJ, Saint S, Flanders SA (2017) The Michigan risk score to predict peripher ‑
ally inserted central catheter ‑associated thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost 
15(10):1951–1962
 105. Zhong L, Wang HL, Xu B, Yuan Y, Wang X, Zhang YY, Ji L, Pan ZM, Hu ZS (2017) Normal saline versus heparin for patency of central venous catheters in adult patients—a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Crit Care 21(1):5
 106. Akl EA, Ramly EP , Kahale LA, Yosuico VE, Barba M, Sperati F, Cook D, Schunemann H (2014) Anticoagulation for people with cancer and central venous catheters. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. https ://doi.org/10.1002/14651 858.CD006 468.pub5/full
 107. van Miert C, Hill R, Jones L (2012) Interventions for restoring patency of occluded central venous catheter lumens. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. https ://doi.org/10.1002/14651 858.CD007 119.pub2
 108. Ernst FR, Chen E, Lipkin C, Tayama D, Amin AN (2014) Comparison of hospital length of stay, costs, and readmissions of alteplase versus catheter replacement among patients with occluded central venous catheters. J Hosp Med 9(8):490–496
 109. Marang‑ van de Mheen PJ, van Bodegom‑ Vos L (2016) Meta‑analysis of 
the central line bundle for preventing catheter ‑related infections: a case 
study in appraising the evidence in quality improvement. BMJ Qual Saf 25(2):118–129
 110. Furuya EY, Dick A, Perencevich EN, Pogorzelska M, Goldmann D, Stone PW (2011) Central line bundle implementation in US intensive care units and impact on bloodstream infections. PLoS One 6(1):e15452
 111. Weaver SJ, Weeks K, Pham JC, Pronovost PJ (2014) On the CUSP: stop BSI: evaluating the relationship between central line ‑associated blood‑
stream infection rate and patient safety climate profile. Am J Infect Control 42(10 Suppl):S203–S208
 112. Pronovost PJ, Weaver SJ, Berenholtz SM, Lubomski LH, Maragakis LL, Marsteller JA, Pham JC, Sawyer MD, Thompson DA, Weeks K et al (2017) Reducing preventable harm: observations on minimizing bloodstream infections. J Health Organ Manag 31(1):2–9
 113. O’Grady NP , Alexander M, Burns LA, Dellinger EP , Garland J, Heard SO, Lipsett PA, Masur H, Mermel LA, Pearson ML et al (2011) Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter ‑related infections. Clin Infect 
Dis 52(9):e162–e193
 114. Loveday HP , Wilson JA, Prieto J, Wilcox MH (2016) epic3: revised recom‑mendation for intravenous catheter and catheter site care. J Hosp Infect 92(4):346–348
 115. Marschall J, Mermel LA, Fakih M, Hadaway L, Kallen A, O’Grady NP , Pettis AM, Rupp ME, Sandora T, Maragakis LL et al (2014) Strategies to prevent central line ‑associated bloodstream infections in acute care hospitals: 
2014 update. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 35(7):753–771
 116. Shapey IM, Foster MA, Whitehouse T, Jumaa P , Bion JF (2009) Central venous catheter ‑related bloodstream infections: improving post ‑inser ‑
tion catheter care. J Hosp Infect 71(2):117–122
 117. Timsit JF, Bouadma L, Ruckly S, Schwebel C, Garrouste ‑Orgeas M, Bron‑
chard R, Calvino ‑Gunther S, Laupland K, Adrie C, Thuong M et al (2012) 
759
Dressing disruption is a major risk factor for catheter ‑related infections. 
Crit Care Med 40(6):1707–1714
 118. Ista E, van der Hoven B, Kornelisse RF, van der Starre C, Vos MC, Boersma 
E, Helder OK (2016) Effectiveness of insertion and maintenance bundles to prevent central‑line ‑associated bloodstream infections in critically 
ill patients of all ages: a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 16(6):724–734
 119. Nicol PW, Watkins RE, Donovan RJ, Wynaden D, Cadwallader H (2009) The power of vivid experience in hand hygiene compliance. J Hosp Infect 72(1):36–42
 120. Zingg W, Holmes A, Dettenkofer M, Goetting T, Secci F, Clack L, Allegranzi B, Magiorakos AP , Pittet D (2015) Hospital organisation, management, and structure for prevention of health‑ care ‑associated 
infection: a systematic review and expert consensus. Lancet Infect Dis 15(2):212–224
 121. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC (2009) Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implement Sci 4:50
 122. Blot K, Bergs J, Vogelaers D, Blot S, Vandijck D (2014) Prevention of cen‑tral line ‑associated bloodstream infections through quality improve ‑
ment interventions: a systematic review and meta‑analysis. Clin Infect Dis 59(1):96–105
 123. van der Kooi T, Sax H, Pittet D, van Dissel J, van Benthem B, Walder B, Cartier V, Clack L, de Greeff S, Wolkewitz M et al (2017) Prevention of hospital infections by intervention and training (PROHIBIT): results of a pan‑European cluster ‑randomized multicentre study to reduce central 
venous catheter ‑related bloodstream infections. Intensive Care Med. 
https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0013 4‑017‑5007‑6
 124. Zingg W, Cartier V, Inan C, Touveneau S, Theriault M, Gayet ‑Ageron A, 
Clergue F, Pittet D, Walder B (2014) Hospital‑ wide multidisciplinary, mul‑
timodal intervention programme to reduce central venous catheter ‑
associated bloodstream infection. PLoS One 9(4):e93898
 125. Langgartner J, Linde HJ, Lehn N, Reng M, Scholmerich J, Gluck T (2004) Combined skin disinfection with chlorhexidine/propanol and aqueous povidone ‑iodine reduces bacterial colonisation of central venous 
catheters. Intensive Care Med 30(6):1081–1088
 126. Patrick S, McDowell A, Lee A, Frau A, Martin U, Gardner E, McLorinan G, Eames N (2017) Antisepsis of the skin before spinal surgery with povidone iodine ‑alcohol followed by chlorhexidine gluconate ‑alcohol 
versus povidone iodine ‑alcohol applied twice for the prevention of 
contamination of the wound by bacteria: a randomised controlled trial. Bone Joint J 99(10):1354–1365
 127. Corley A, Cantara M, Gardner J, Trexler P , Rock C, Maragakis LL (2017) Central line ‑associated bloodstream infection rate elevation: attribut ‑
able to National Healthcare Safety Network surveillance definition changes, ongoing opportunities for infection prevention, or both? Am J Infect Control 45(9):1030–1032
