PERSPECTIVES
OPINION

Guillain–Barré and Miller Fisher
syndromes—new diagnostic classification
Benjamin R. Wakerley, Antonino Uncini and Nobuhiro Yuki for the
GBS Classification Group
Abstract | Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) and its variant, Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS),
exist as several clinical subtypes with different neurological features and presentations.
Although the typical clinical features of GBS and MFS are well recognized, current
classification systems do not comprehensively describe the full spectrum of either
syndrome. In this Perspectives article, GBS and MFS are classified on the basis of
current understanding of the common pathophysiological profiles of each disease
phenotype. GBS is subclassified into classic and localized forms (for example,
pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness and bifacial weakness with paraesthesias),
and MFS is divided into incomplete (for example, acute ophthalmoparesis, acute ataxic
neuropathy) and CNS subtypes (Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis). Diagnostic criteria
based on clinical characteristics are suggested for each condition. We believe this
approach to be more inclusive than existing systems, and argue that it could facilitate
early clinical diagnosis and initiation of appropriate immunotherapy.
Wakerley, B. R. et al. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10, 537–544 (2014); published online 29 July 2014;
corrected online 7 October 2014; doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2014.138

Introduction

Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is the
broad term used to describe a number of
related acute autoimmune neuropathies,
although the term is also used more speci­
fically to define patients with peripheral
polyneuropathy affecting all four limbs
with or without cranial nerve involve­
ment. GBS was first recognized in 1916 by
Guillain, Barré and Strohl, who described
two patients who developed acute ­areflexic
paralysis in association with raised protein
levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), but no
increased cell content.1 By 1938, Guillain
had recognized various forms of GBS and
proposed a clinical classification that took
into account four presentations: the lower
form, the spinal and midbrain form, the
midbrain form, and ­poly­radiculo­neuropathy
with impaired mentation.2
Almost 20 years later, in his seminal
paper, Miller Fisher described three patients
with “an unusual variant of acute idiopathic
polyneuritis (syndrome of ophthalmo­
plegia, ataxia and areflexia),” which bore
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

resemblance to the midbrain form pro­
posed by Guillain.2,3 Contemporaneously,
Bickerstaff described eight patients who
presented with ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and
hypersomnolence, similar to—yet distinct
from—GBS polyradiculoneuropathy with
impaired mentation.4
Clinical diagnostic criteria for GBS were
introduced in 1978 following an increase
in incidence after the swine flu vaccination
programme, and these criteria were later
reaffirmed.5,6 The criteria were devised to
enable non-neurologists to recognize GBS
and were intentionally restrictive, requir­
ing the presence of universal limb areflexia
or hyporeflexia. However, with the identi­
fication of several new phenotypes in the
past 30 years, the conceptual framework
of GBS has become increasingly complex.
For example, in 1986, Ropper described
patients who developed rapidly progressive
oropharyngeal, neck and shoulder weak­
ness that mimicked the descending paralysis
seen in botulism.7 In 1994, the same author
also described some patients with areflexic
paraparesis7,8 and others with acute pro­
gression of facial diplegia and numbness in
the extremities;8 he speculated that these

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROLOGY

three conditions were localized subtypes of
GBS, which he called pharyngeal–cervical–­
brachial weakness, the paraparetic variant,
and bifacial weakness with paraesthesias,
respectively. These studies led, in 1990, to
proposed diagnostic criteria for pure motor
GBS, pure sensory GBS, MFS, several local­
ized subtypes of GBS (including pharyngeal–
cervical–­brachial weakness and paraparetic
GBS) and pure pandysautonomia.9
A further revision was prompted by results
from nerve conduction studies. Classification
criteria published in 2001 by a GBS consen­
sus group based in the Netherlands described
several subtypes of GBS: sensorimotor GBS,
pure motor GBS, MFS and a bulbar form.10
Nerve conduction studies enabled the group
to further subclassify sensorimotor GBS
into either acute inflammatory demyelinat­
ing polyneuro­pathy (AIDP) or acute motor–
sensory axonal neuropathy, and pure motor
GBS into acute motor demyelinating neuro­
pathy or acute motor axonal neuropathy
(AMAN). Criteria outlined by the Brighton
Collaboration GBS working group in 2011
have also used nerve conduction studies to
identify patients with vaccination-related
GBS or MFS.11
The primary aim of this Perspectives
article from the GBS Classification Group
(Box 1) is to present clinical criteria to
enable neurologists and non-neurologists
to diagnose GBS and all its variants using a
simple yet all-inclusive classification sys­tem.
While some variants are rare (for example,
acute ptosis and acute mydri­asis) and might
never be encountered by many physi­
cians, others (for example, pharyngeal–­
cervical–brachial weakness) might be
more common than previously thought,
having been frequently misdiagnosed as
myasthenia gravis, botulism or brainstem
stroke.12 We also consider the classification
of GBS, MFS and their subtypes. Rather
than broadly categorizing each subtype as
an axonal or demyelinating neuropathy,
we propose new diagnostic criteria based
on an inclusive set of clinical features. To
avoid confusion, we use the terms ‘classic
GBS’ to describe patients who present with
acute flaccid paralysis of all four limbs,
and ‘GBS subtypes’ to collectively describe
the localized forms of GBS. Similarly, we
use ‘classic MFS’ to describe patients with
VOLUME 10 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | 537

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
Box 1 | The GBS Classification Group
■■ Shahram Attarian, Centre Hospitalier de la Timone, Marseille, France
■■ Jong Seok Bae, Hallym University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea
■■ Amilton A. Barreira, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
■■ Yee-Cheun Chan, National University Hospital, Singapore
■■ Alain Créange, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France
■■ Sung-Tsang Hsieh, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
■■ Badrul Islam, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, Dhaka,
Bangladesh
■■ Meena A. Kannan, Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, India
■■ Nobuo Kohara, Kobe City Medical Centre General Hospital, Kobe City, Japan
■■ Norito Kokubun, Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi, Japan
■■ Jean-Pascal Lefaucheur, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France
■■ Osvaldo Nascimento, Federal Fluminense University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
■■ Nortina Shahrizaila, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
■■ Umapathi Thirugnanam, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore
■■ Antonino Uncini, University G. d’Annunzio, Chieti, Italy
■■ Peter Van den Bergh, University Hospitals St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium
■■ Benjamin R. Wakerley, Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK
■■ Einar Wilder-Smith, National University Hospital, Singapore
■■ Rawiphan Witoonpanich, Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand
■■ Nobuhiro Yuki, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Table 1 | Clinical features of GBS, MFS and their subtypes
Category

Clinical features
Pattern of weakness

Ataxia

Hypersomnolence

Classic GBS

Four limbs

No or minimal

No

Pharyngeal–cervical–brachial
weakness*

Bulbar, cervical and
upper limbs

No

No

Acute pharyngeal weakness‡

Bulbar

No

No

Paraparetic GBS*

Lower limbs

No

No

Bifacial weakness with
paraesthesias*

Facial

No

No

Classic MFS

Ophthalmoplegia

Yes

No

Acute ophthalmoparesis§

Ophthalmoplegia

No

No

Acute ataxic neuropathy

No weakness

Yes

No

Acute ptosis§

Ptosis

No

No

Acute mydriasis§

Paralytic mydriasis

No

No

BBE

Ophthalmoplegia

Yes

Yes

Acute ataxic hypersomnolence¶

No weakness

Yes

Yes

GBS

MFS

§

||

*Localized subtypes of GBS. ‡Incomplete form of pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness. §Incomplete forms of MFS. ||CNS
subtype of MFS. ¶Incomplete form of BBE. Abbreviations: BBE, Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis; GBS, Guillain–Barré
syndrome; MFS, Miller Fisher syndrome.

acute ophthalmo­plegia and ataxia, whereas
the ‘MFS subtypes’ encompass both
more-extensive (that is, with additional
features, such as hyper­s omnolence) and
­less-extensive ­(incomplete) forms of MFS.

Nosological considerations

Though phenotypically different, GBS and
MFS subtypes share a number of clinical
features including the presence of ante­
cedent infection, a monophasic disease
course, areflexia, distal paraesthesias, CSF
538 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 10

albuminocytological dissociation, and
nerve conduction abnormalities. 3,4,7,8,13
In addition, some patients have overlap­
ping or sequential diagnoses: some patients
with MFS develop tetraplegia during the
clinical course of illness, 14 one patient
with pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weak­
ness was reported to develop leg weakness
during the progressive phase of the illness,15
and another patient in the recovery phase
of classic GBS showed only pharyngeal–­
cervical–brachial weakness.16 These factors



support the classification of these various
disease subtypes within the spectrum of
GBS (Table 1).
Phenotypic differences among the local­
ized GBS subtypes—pharyngeal–­cervical–
brachial weakness, paraparetic GBS and
bifacial weakness with paraesthesias—are
nosologically defined according to the
pattern and characteristics of limb and cranial
nerve involvement. Phenotypic differences
among the MFS subtypes—the CNS subtype
Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis (BBE),
and the incomplete forms, acute ophthalmo­
paresis and acute ataxic ­neuropathy—are
defined on the basis of presence or absence
of hyper­somno­lence, or at least one of the
cardinal features of MFS (ophthalmo­plegia
and ataxia). Other localized subtypes of
GBS, including sixth cranial nerve paresis
with paraesthesias, and severe ptosis without
ophthalmoplegia, have been described7,8 but
these conditions can be positioned in our
classification system as incomplete forms of
MFS, termed acute ­ophthalmoparesis and
acute ptosis, respectively.
Acute sensory small-fibre ­neuropathy,
acute sensory and autonomic neuro­
pathy, and acute pandysautonomia prob­
ably represent postinfectious autoimmune
conditions similar to GBS.17–20 However, to
avoid confusion—and in keeping with other
authors10,11—we have not included these dis­
orders in our classification of GBS variants.
By contrast, acute sensory large-fibre neuro­
pathy,20 which has been described as pure
sensory GBS or acute sensory ataxic neuro­
pathy,9,21 can be positioned as an incom­
plete form of MFS, namely, acute ataxic
­neuropathy, in our classification.22
Although nerve conduction studies are
not required in our clinical classification
system, they can be useful in elucidating the
type of neuropathy and supporting the diag­
nosis. The underlying nerve conduction
abnormalities associated with GBS and its
subtypes can be categorized as demyelinat­
ing (AIDP) and axonal (AMAN and acute
sensorimotor axonal neuropathy) forms.23
Electrophysiological studies indicate that
MFS, pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weak­
ness and paraparetic GBS are all axonal
forms of neuropathy,24–26 whereas bifacial
weakness with paraesthesias is demyelin­
ating in nature. 27 The axonal forms are
associated with antiganglioside anti­bodies
(Table 2), and affected patients might
show promptly reversible nerve conduc­
tion failure or axonal degeneration. This
feature suggests a common pathogenetic
mechanism of autoantibody-mediated
www.nature.com/nrneurol

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
Table 2 | Diagnostic criteria for GBS, MFS and their subtypes
Classification

Core clinical features

Notes

Supportive features

Mostly symmetric pattern of limb
and/or motor cranial-nerve
weakness*‡§

Alternative diagnosis should be excluded

Antecedent infectious symptoms||

General syndrome
All GBS spectrum
disorders

Presence of distal paraesthesia
at or before the onset of
weakness

Monophasic disease course with
interval between onset and nadir
of weakness of 12 h to 28 days,
followed by clinical plateau

Cerebrospinal fluid
albuminocytological dissociation¶

Specific diagnoses
Classic GBS

Weakness* and areflexia/
hyporeflexia in all four limbs

Weakness usually starts in the legs and ascends but may
start in the arms

Electrophysiological evidence
of neuropathy

Weakness may be mild, moderate or complete paralysis
Cranial-nerve-innervated muscles or respiratory muscles
may be involved
Muscle stretch reflexes may be normal or exaggerated in
10% of cases
Pharyngeal–
cervical–brachial
weakness

Oropharyngeal, neck and arm
weakness*‡ and arm areflexia/
hyporeflexia

Absence of certain features indicates incomplete pharyngeal–
cervical–brachial weakness: patients without arm and neck
weakness have ‘acute oropharyngeal palsy’; patients without
pharyngeal palsy have ‘acute cervicobrachial weakness’

Absence of leg weakness

Electrophysiological evidence
of neuropathy
Presence of anti-GT1a or
anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies

Some leg weakness may be present, but oropharyngeal, neck
and arm weakness should be more prominent
Presence of additional features indicates overlap with other
GBS variants: ataxia with ophthalmoplegia suggests overlap
with MFS; ataxia without ophthalmoplegia suggests
overlap with acute ataxic neuropathy; ataxia, ophthalmoplegia
and disturbed consciousness suggests overlap with BBE
Paraparetic GBS

Leg weakness* and leg areflexia/
hyporeflexia

Typically, bladder function is normal and there is no
well-defined sensory level

Electrophysiological evidence
of neuropathy

In some patients, limb paraesthesias may be absent
and muscle stretch reflexes may be normal

Electrophysiological evidence
of neuropathy

Absence of certain features indicates incomplete MFS: patients
without ataxia have ‘acute ophthalmoparesis’; patients without
ophthalmoplegia have ‘acute ataxic neuropathy’

Presence of anti-GQ1b IgG
antibodies

Absence of arm weakness
Bifacial weakness
with paraesthesias

Facial weakness* and limb
areflexia/hyporeflexia
Absence of ophthalmoplegia,
ataxia and limb weakness

MFS

Ophthalmoplegia, ataxia*‡
and areflexia/hyporeflexia
Absence of limb weakness#
and hypersomnolence

BBE

Hypersomnolence and
ophthalmoplegia and ataxia*‡

Presence of a single feature indicates incomplete MFS: ptosis
suggests ‘acute ptosis’; mydriasis suggests ‘acute mydriasis’
Patients without ophthalmoplegia have the incomplete form
of BBE known as ‘acute ataxic hypersomnolence’

Presence of anti-GQ1b IgG
antibodies

Absence of limb weakness#
*Weakness may be asymmetric or unilateral. ‡Clinical severity of each component may vary from partial to complete. §Except in acute ataxic neuropathy and acute ataxic hypersomnolence.
||
Such as the presence of upper respiratory infectious symptoms or diarrhoea 3 days to 6 weeks before the onset of neurological symptoms. ¶Cerebrospinal fluid with total white cell count
<50 cells per μl and protein above the normal laboratory range. #Presence of limb weakness indicates overlap with GBS. Abbreviations: BBE, Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis; GBS, Guillain–
Barré syndrome; MFS, Miller Fisher syndrome.

dysfunction or disruption at the nodes of
Ranvier, resulting in a continuum of nerve
pathologies from transitory conduction
failure to axonal degeneration.23,26,28
We believe that the updated classifica­
tion system we present enables most forms
of GBS to be accurately defined as discrete
or overlapping syndromes on the basis of
their clinical features.

Clinical–serological relationship
Our classification system does not stipulate
antiganglioside antibody testing, although

the results can be informative. The discov­
ery of anti-GQ1b antibodies in patients with
MFS and BBE provided important evidence
that these disorders formed part of the
same disease spectrum,29 and a comparative
study revealed that anti-GQ1b antibodies
were present in 83% of patients with MFS
and 68% of patients with BBE.30 GQ1b is
strongly expressed in the oculo­motor, troch­
lear and abducens nerves, as well as muscle
spindles; thus, anti-GQ1b antibodies are
thought to cause both ophthalmoplegia and
cerebellar-like ataxia.31,32 In addition, GQ1b

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROLOGY

is possibly expressed in the reticular for­
mation, and anti-GQ1b antibodies might,
therefore, explain the decreased level of
consciousness seen in patients with BBE.30
Acute ophthalmoparesis is also associated
with the presence of anti-GQ1b antibod­
ies, and some patients later develop bilateral
facial or bulbar weakness.22 Neither ptosis
nor mydriasis is a cardinal feature of MFS,
but patients often present with these signs.33
Isolated ptosis and mydriasis, caused by
weakness of the levator palpebrae superi­oris
and iris sphincter muscles, respectively, have
VOLUME 10 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | 539

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
also been reported in association with antiGQ1b antibodies, and these features might
­represent a very incomplete form of MFS.34,35
So-called ataxic GBS is characterized by
profound cerebellar-like ataxia in the absence
of both a Romberg sign and ophthalmo­
plegia.13 Patients with ataxic GBS also carry
anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies, which supports
its classification as an incomplete form of
MFS.36 Acute sensory ataxic neuropathy is
characterized by profound sensory ataxia in
the absence of ophthalmoplegia, but with a
Romberg sign.21 The nosological position
of acute sensory ataxic neuropathy became
clear when affected individuals were com­
pared with patients who had ataxic GBS.33
Anti-GQ1b antibodies were found in 18%
of patients with acute sensory ataxic neuro­
pathy, and in 65% of patients with ataxic
GBS. Anti-GD1b IgG antibodies without
GQ1b crossreactivity were detected in 35% of
the patients with acute sensory ataxic neuro­
pathy and 14% of those with ataxic GBS.
These findings suggest that the conditions
are not distinct but, rather, variants within a
continuous spectrum. Cerebellar-like ataxia
has also been described in patients with
MFS, and is thought to be caused by selec­
tive dysfunction of muscle spindle affer­
ents mediated by anti-GQ1b anti­bodies.3,37
To avoid confusion, ataxic GBS and acute
sensory ataxic neuropathy are classified
in this article as incomplete forms of MFS,
and are collectively referred to as acute
ataxic neuropathy.33,38,39
GT1a is more densely expressed than
GQ1b in human glossopharyngeal and vagal
nerves.40 Patients with pharyngeal–cervical–
brachial weakness often carry anti-GT1a IgG
antibodies, some of which might crossreact
with GQ1b.41 Although the serological pro­
files of patients with pharyngeal–­cervical–
brachial weakness show con­s iderable
overlap with those of patients with MFS, we
believe that pharyngeal–­cervical–­brachial
weakness is best placed as a subtype of GBS
rather than MFS. By definition, patients
with pharyngeal–­cervical–brachial weak­
ness display arm weakness, whereas those
with MFS do not, and pharyngeal–­cervical–­
brachial weakness should, therefore, be
considered a localized subtype of GBS.
Patients with acute oropharyngeal palsy
have anti-GT1a and anti-GQ1b anti­bodies,42
supporting the classification of this condi­
tion as an incomplete form of pharyngeal–­
cervical–brachial weakness. By contrast,
AMAN is associated with anti-GM1 or antiGD1a IgG antibodies,43 and the discovery
of anti-GD1a antibodies in a patient with
540 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 10

paraparetic GBS whose nerve conduction
results indicated axonal neuro­pathy sug­
gested that ­paraparetic GBS is a localized
form of AMAN.25

Peripheral versus central pathology
Many neurologists view GBS as a disease
that only affects the peripheral nerves,
but this assertion is not always true: some
patients display exaggerated deep tendon
reflexes, either transiently or throughout the
course of their illness.44,45 The early formal
criteria for GBS5 required hyporeflexia or
areflexia, but the researcher who developed
these criteria later recognized that some
patients with features otherwise typical
of GBS also displayed “extensor plantar
responses, and ill-defined sensory levels,”
indicating possible CNS involvement. 6
Although application of these criteria has
enabled most patients with GBS to be identi­
fied, some individuals have ­undoubtedly
been misdiagnosed in the past.
The risk of misdiagnosis was first high­
lighted in a report that described three
North American men who each developed
rapidly progressive tetraparesis after a
gastrointestinal illness, but were not diag­
nosed as having GBS owing to the presence
of normal to brisk deep tendon reflexes.46
Similarly, acute pure motor neuropathy in
four patients who carried anti-GM1 IgG
antibodies was not initially diagnosed as
GBS because of the preservation of reflexes,
yet nerve conduction studies later con­
firmed AMAN.47 The presence of hyper­
reflexia resulted in AMAN being initially
misdiagnosed as postinfectious myelitis in a
patient with progressive weakness in all four
limbs, although nerve conduction studies
later revealed the correct diagnosis.48
A study of 213 patients with GBS identified
23 patients (10%) who demonstrated normal
or brisk reflexes during the clinical course of
illness.45 Among these individuals, tendon
reflexes were normal in eight patients and
exaggerated in three patients throughout the
course of illness. The remaining 12 patients
exhibited exaggerated reflexes at some stage,
which later returned to normal. Interestingly,
patients with GBS who had preserved deep
tendon reflexes more frequently presented
with pure motor limb weakness, and were
more likely to have anti-GM1 or anti-GD1a
antibodies, as well as neurophysio­logical
features consistent with AMAN, than were
patients with reduced reflexes. A similar
rate (9%) of normal or exaggerated reflexes
was observed in a study of 494 patients with
GBS in the Netherlands, and most of these



patients showed evidence of a mild, pure
motor neuro­pathy.49 Some clini­cians have
suggested that such individuals should be
categ­orized as having a ‘hyper­reflexic variant’
of GBS,50 but we believe that this distinction is
unnecessary. The localization and underlying
mechanism of hyper­reflexia in such individ­
uals remain unknown, although disruption
of intramedullary inhibitory interneurons,
which could occur if anti­ganglio­side anti­
bodies crossed the ­blood–brain barrier, has
been postulated.48
The earliest descriptions of BBE and MFS
suggested overlap between the two syn­
dromes; for example, half of Bickerstaff ’s
patients had hyporeflexia or areflexia,4 and
one of Miller Fisher’s three patients experi­
enced drowsiness. 3 This overlap led to
widespread conjecture about whether the
aetiologies of these disorders were central or
peripheral. In a large sample of patients with
BBE, CNS pathology was observed on brain
MRI in 11%, and abnormal EEG recordings
were obtained in 57%.30 Though only 2% of
patients with MFS showed abnormalities
on MRI, 25% of patients had aberrant EEG
activity,30 which indicated that some patients
with MFS—despite having no impairment of
consciousness—had evidence of CNS dys­
function. A complementary overlap between
BBE and MFS exists with regard to PNS
pathology: 74% of patients with MFS dem­
onstrated absence of the soleus H‑reflex in
peripheral nerve testing, as did three of four
patients with BBE. Together, these results
suggest that MFS and BBE lie within a clini­
cal spectrum of variable involvement of the
PNS and CNS.

Diagnosis and classification

We believe that the diagnosis of GBS, MFS
and their subtypes can be made clinically
in the majority of patients, and that current
diagnostic criteria are too rigid and overly
reliant on laboratory data.6,10,11 Nerve con­
duction studies and CSF analysis are often
inconclusive in the early stages of disease and,
therefore, should not delay diagnosis and
treatment if GBS or its variants are sus­
pected on clinical grounds. CSF albumino­
cytological dissociation is absent within the
first week of symptom onset in more than
half of patients with GBS.51 In approximately
40% of patients, nerve conduction studies
performed within the first week can suggest a
diagnosis of neuropathy without fulfilling the
criteria for one of the specific electrophysio­
logical subtypes.49 Moreover, on the basis of
serial nerve conduction study recordings,
the electrophysiological classification of
www.nature.com/nrneurol

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
GBS has been shown to change in 24–38%
of patients , making the diagnosis of the
precise subtype an a posteri­ori process.23,52
Furthermore, neurophysiological examina­
tion is not readily available in some parts
of the world. Antiganglioside antibody
testing is useful, but obtaining results takes
time and, ­therefore, should not be relied on
for diagnosis.
Striking an optimal balance between diag­
nostic criteria that are neither too inclusive
nor too restrictive remains important for
clinical practice. Two decades ago, the
American Academy of Neurology outlined
strict diagnostic criteria (specificity 100%,
sensitivity 46%) for chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP).53
These criteria have since been replaced by
slightly less specific (96%) but much more
sensitive (81%) criteria that enable the rec­
ognition of atypical presentations, for which
immunotherapy would have otherwise been
delayed or withheld. 54,55 We believe that
a similar reappraisal of the current diag­
nostic and classification criteria for GBS
is warranted to avoid underdiagnosis and
delayed treatment, especially in patients
with atypical forms or those with normal or
­exaggerated deep tendon reflexes.
The diagnostic criteria that we present
in Table 2 facilitate the classification of
GBS, MFS and their subtypes. Weakness,
which may affect the limbs or the terri­
tories served by motor cranial nerves, is
a core feature that is present in almost all
subtypes, the main exceptions being acute
ataxic neuropathy and acute ataxic hyper­
somnolence (Table 1). Weakness is usually
symmetric; however, unilateral ophthalmo­
plegia with or without unilateral ataxia
(and, rarely, with unilateral limb weak­
ness) has been reported in association with
antiganglioside antibodies.11,56–58
The other core feature is that the clini­
cal course should be monophasic. The time
interval between the onset and nadir of
neurological symptoms ranges from 12 h to
28 days, and is followed by a clinical plateau.
In a study published in 2014, 97% of patients
with GBS reached symptom nadir within
4 weeks.49 We regard treatment-related clin­
ical fluctuations occurring within 8 weeks
after the start of immunotherapy as part
of the monophasic course, and patients
exhibiting these fluctuations should be dif­
ferentiated from patients with acute-onset
CIDP.59 The latter diagnosis should be con­
sidered in patients who deteriorate after
8 weeks from initial onset, or when three or
more treatment-­related fluctuations occur.

Recurrent GBS is seen in less than 10% of
patients, but subsequent episodes seem to
become more severe and occur at shorter
time intervals as time goes on.60,61 A history
of upper respiratory infections or diarrhoea
3 days to 6 weeks before the onset of GBS is
common and supports the diagnosis.
GBS can be diagnosed in patients who
present with bilateral flaccid limb weakness.
Frequently, patients with GBS also experi­
ence distal limb numbness, paraesthesia or
pain, any of which can even be their initial
symptom.62 Weakness associated with GBS
is often described as ascending, and might
involve respiratory muscles and cranial
nerves. Up to 10% of patients might display
normal or exaggerated reflexes throughout
the disease course.45,49 In patients with sus­
pected GBS who present with preserved or
exaggerated reflexes, repeated nerve con­
duction studies are essential, as evidence
of peripheral neuropathy can confirm
the diagnosis.
The key clinical finding in patients with
pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness is
oropharyngeal, neck and arm weakness
associated with areflexia.12 The majority also
experience some sensory disturbance in the
arms, although sensory impairment was not
included in the original description of this
GBS subtype.7 The consistency and severity
of leg weakness varies within and between
patients, but generally should not be more
prominent than arm weakness. Incomplete
forms of pharyngeal–­cervical–brachial weak­
ness have also been described. For example,
isolated bulbar palsy results in acute pharyn­
geal weakness,42 but can also progress to com­
plete pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness
during the course of the illness.63 Along with
such transitions, the presence of anti-GT1a
or anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies further sup­
ports the clinical diagnosis of pharyngeal–­
cervical–brachial weakness (or one of its
incomplete forms).24,41
Patients with paraparetic GBS develop
flaccid leg weakness, but have normal
neuro­logical findings in the upper limbs.7,8
The diagnosis is supported by evidence
of axonal-type neuropathy on ner ve
conduction studies, and the presence of
antiganglioside antibodies.25
Bilateral facial weakness in the absence of
limb weakness can be sufficient to warrant
a diagnosis of bifacial weakness with par­
aesthesias, although sensory disturbance
in the limbs also occurs in the majority of
individuals.8,27 Diagnosis is supported by
demyelinating features on nerve ­conduction
studies in the limbs.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROLOGY

Patients with MFS present with ophthal­
moplegia, ataxia and areflexia,3 and those
who additionally experience hypersomno­
lence have BBE, the CNS subtype of MFS.4,64
Although none of the patients originally
described by Bickerstaff displayed hyper­
reflexia, some researchers have suggested that
the presence of hyperreflexia is sufficient to
diagnose BBE even in the absence of hyper­
somnolence, because both features indicate
CNS involvement.65 However, given that
some patients with GBS also display hyper­
reflexia,45 our classification system categ­
orizes such patients as having MFS rather
than BBE. Incomplete forms of MFS include
acute ataxic neuropathy, which can be diag­
nosed in the absence of ophthalmoplegia,33
and acute ophthalmo­paresis, which can be
diagnosed in the absence of ataxia.22 Very
incomplete forms of MFS show only isolated
ptosis or mydriasis.34,35 Incomplete BBE,
known as acute ataxic hypersomnolence,
can be the diagnosis in patients who have
evidence of ataxia and hypersomnolence in
the absence of ophthal­moplegia.66 The pres­
ence of anti-GQ1b or anti-GD1b IgG anti­
bodies can confirm the clinical diagnosis of
these MFS subtypes.
The possibility of overlap between GBS,
MFS and their subtypes warrants brief dis­
cussion. Patients with MFS or BBE who
develop limb weakness can be diagnosed
as having overlap with GBS.14,65 Leg weak­
ness can develop in some patients with
­pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness. If
it occurs early and is severe,16 this represents
fulminant pharyngeal–cervical–brachial
weakness, rather than overlap with GBS. As
outlined in the original description,7 patients
with pharyngeal–cervical–­brachial weakness
could present with ophthalmoplegia, whereas
those patients with pharyngeal–cervical–­
brachial weakness presenting with additional
ophthalmo­plegia and ataxia in the absence of
tetraparesis have ­overlapping MFS.
The frequency of different subtypes
within the GBS–MFS spectrum has not
been examined in detail, and is likely to vary
in different parts of the world. One prospec­
tive study of more than 250 patients diag­
nosed with GBS at a single hospital in the
USA found the following frequencies: MFS
5%, pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness
3%, paraparetic GBS 2%, and bifacial weak­
ness with paraesthesias 1%.9 A retrospective
single-hospital study conducted in Taiwan
found the following frequencies among 43
patients: MFS 7%, BBE 7%, pharyngeal–­
cervical–brachial weakness 5%, and poly­
neuritis cranialis 5%. 67 In a study from
VOLUME 10 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | 541

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
Box 2 | Differential diagnoses
GBS
■■ Acute spinal cord disease
■■ Carcinomatous or lymphomatous
meningitis
■■ Myasthenia gravis
■■ Critical illness neuropathy
■■ Thiamine deficiency
■■ Periodic paralysis
■■ Corticosteroid-induced myopathy
■■ Toxins (such as neurotoxic shellfish
poisoning)
■■ Acute hypophosphataemia
■■ Prolonged use of neuromuscular junction
blocking drugs
■■ Tick paralysis
■■ West Nile poliomyelitis
■■ Acute intermittent porphyria
■■ Functional paralysis
MFS, BBE, and pharyngeal–cervical–brachial
weakness
■■ Brainstem stroke
■■ Myasthenia gravis
■■ Wernicke encephalopathy
■■ Botulism
■■ Brainstem encephalitis
■■ Diphtheria
■■ Tick paralysis
Paraparetic GBS
■■ Lumbosacral plexopathy
■■ Diabetic neuropathy
■■ Neoplasms
■■ Inflammatory conditions (such as
sarcoidosis)
■■ Infections (such as cytomegalovirus,
Lyme disease)
■■ Lesions of the cauda equina
Bifacial weakness with paraesthesias
■■ Lyme disease
■■ Sarcoidosis
Abbreviations: BBE, Bickerstaff brainstem
encephalitis; GBS, Guillain–Barré syndrome; MFS,
Miller Fisher syndrome.

the Netherlands that applied the Brighton
crit­e ria11 to diagnose approximately 500
patients with GBS, after exclusion of those
with MFS and BBE, weakness was restricted
to the legs in 6% of patients, which suggests
a diagnosis of paraparetic GBS, and to the
arms in 1% of patients, in keeping with
­pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness.49

Differential diagnoses

Numerous conditions can mimic GBS,
MFS and their subtypes. In this section, we
highlight the most important of these dif­
ferential diagnoses—diseases that also cause
rapidly progressive and often symmetric
paresis (Box 2).68
In patients who present with weakness and
exaggerated reflexes, a central cause should
always be excluded before the weakness is
542 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 10

attributed to GBS. Conversely, patients with
extensive necrotizing myelo­pathy can lose
their deep tendon reflexes. Spinal cord or, in
some patients, brainstem pathology should
be excluded early with MRI, especially if a
‘sensory level’—a point on the body below
which sensation is reduced or absent—is
present, or if weakness develops abruptly in
association with urinary retention. Although
urinary dysfunction may develop in over
one-quarter of patients with GBS,69 typically
it is not an early feature.
Isolated sensory symptoms in the pres­
ence of normal deep tendon reflexes might
be misdiagnosed as a conversion or dissoci­
ative disorder in some patients with GBS,
especially early in the disease course. Such
patients should be advised to return to the
clinic if they experience disease progres­
sion. By contrast, functional weakness is
usually sudden in onset (less than 12 h into
the disease course) and asymmetric. When
present, motor and sensory physical signs
are inconsistent or incongruent with any
GBS subtype. In the absence of sensory defi­
cits, differential diagnoses for GBS include
periodic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, botu­
lism, poliomyelitis, and acute myopathy of
any cause.
The main differential diagnoses for both
MFS and pharyngeal–cervical–brachial
weakness are brainstem strokes, myas­
thenia gravis and botulism. In patients with
reduced levels of consciousness, Wernicke
encephalopathy and brainstem encephali­
tis should be excluded before considering
BBE. In patients with isolated or multiple
cranial neuropathies—especially when
these are asymmetric—other inflammatory,
neoplastic and infectious aetiologies must
be excluded.
In the early stages, paraparetic GBS can
be difficult to distinguish from other more
common conditions, such as lumbosacral
plexopathy or cauda equina syndrome. MRI
with gadolinium contrast of the lumbo­sacral
region is, therefore, mandatory to exclude an
infiltrative or compressive cause of the para­
paresis. In patients with diabetic neuropathy
or idiopathic lumbosacral plexopathy, onset
is typically asymmetric, with continued pro­
gression and bilateral involvement beyond
1 month. Cytomegalovirus infection in
the context of HIV-positive patients might
also cause painful lumbosacral plexopathy,
and this infection is usually associated with
urinary retention.
Careful history taking and clinical exami­
nation should enable clinicians to differen­
tiate bifacial weakness with paraesthesias



from bilateral Bell palsy in the majority of
individuals. Typically, patients with bilateral
Bell palsy do not have distal paraesthesias70
and are likely to present with other features,
including mastoid pain and hyperacusis;
these patients are less likely to recover fully
than are patients with bifacial weakness
with paraesthesias.27 Laboratory data can
also differentiate patients with Bell palsy
(who do not demonstrate CSF albumino­
cytological dissociation or evidence of
demyelination in their limbs) from indi­
viduals who have bifacial weakness with
paraesthesias. However, rapidly progres­
sive isolated bilateral facial weakness may
also be present in patients with sarcoidosis
or Lyme disease.

Conclusions

In this article, we classify GBS, MFS and
their subtypes according to their clinical
features. The appreciation that these condi­
tions form a continuum wherein discrete,
complete and incomplete forms of disease
exist (and sometimes overlap) remains
the most important concept for defining
atypical presentations of these disorders
and overlap syndromes. The validity of this
classification system still needs to be tested
in large cohorts of patients by independent
assessors in different parts of the world, and
we accept that further refinements may be
necessary. Moreover, this classification
system should be discussed in the context
of guidelines for the management of GBS
published by the European Federation of
Neurological Societies and the Peripheral
Nerve Society. The use of this classifica­
tion system could enable important data
to be collected on the frequency of differ­
ent subtypes of GBS and MFS in different
countries, as well as the natural course
of these illnesses and their responses to
treatment. We envisage that this approach
would help to identify the most commonly
encountered differential diagnoses for each
variant, and contribute to the development
of ­standardized management protocols.
Department of Neurology, Gloucestershire
Royal Hospital, Great Western Road,
Gloucester GL1 3NN, UK (B.R.W.). Department
of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical
Sciences, University G. d’Annunzio, Via dei
Vestini 31, Chieti 66013, Italy (A.U.).
Departments of Medicine and Physiology,
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Unit 09‑01, Centre
for Translational Medicine, 14 Medical Drive,
Singapore 117599, Singapore (N.Y.).
Correspondence to: N.Y.
mdcyuki@nus.edu.sg

www.nature.com/nrneurol
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Guillain, G., Barré, J. A. & Strohl, A. Sur un
syndrome de radiculonévrite avec
hyperalbuminose du liquide céphalo-rachidien
sans réaction cellulaire: remarques sur les
caractères cliniques et graphiques des réflexes
tendineux [French]. Bull. Mem. Hop. Paris 40,
1462–1470 (1916).
Guillain, G. Les polyradiculonévrites avec
dissociation alumbinocytologique et á evolution
favorable (syndrome de Guillain et Barré)
[French]. J. Belge Neurol. Psychiatr. 38,
323–329 (1938).
Fisher, M. An unusual variant of acute
idiopathic polyneuritis (syndrome of
ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and areflexia). N. Engl.
J. Med. 255, 57–65 (1956).
Bickerstaff, E. R. Brain-stem encephalitis:
further observations on a grave syndrome with
benign prognosis. Br. Med. J. 1, 1384–1387
(1957).
Asbury, A. K., Arnason, B. G., Karp, H. R. &
McFarlin, D. E. Criteria for diagnosis of Guillain–
Barré syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 3, 565–566
(1978).
Asbury, A. K. & Cornblath, D. R. Assessment of
current diagnostic criteria for Guillain–Barré
syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 27 (Suppl.), S21–S24
(1990).
Ropper, A. H. Unusual clinical variants and
signs in Guillain–Barré syndrome. Arch. Neurol.
43, 1150–1152 (1986).
Ropper, A. H. Further regional variants of acute
immune polyneuropathy: bifacial weakness or
sixth nerve paresis with paresthesias, lumbar
polyradiculopathy, and ataxia with pharyngeal–
cervical–brachial weakness. Arch. Neurol. 51,
671–675 (1994).
Ropper, A. H., Wijdicks, E. F. M. & Truax, B.
Guillain–Barré Syndrome (F. A. Davis, 1990).
van der Meché, F. G. et al. Diagnostic and
classification criteria for the Guillain–Barré
syndrome. Eur. Neurol. 45, 133–139 (2001).
Sejvar, J. J. et al. Guillain–Barré syndrome
and Fisher syndrome: case definitions and
guidelines for collection, analysis, and
presentation of immunization safety data.
Vaccine 29, 599–612 (2011).
Wakerley, B. R. & Yuki, N. Pharyngeal–cervical–
brachial variant of Guillain–Barré syndrome.
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 85, 339–344
(2013).
Richter, R. B. The ataxic form of
polyradiculoneuritis (Landry–Guillain–Barré
syndrome): clinical and pathologic
observations. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 21,
171–184 (1962).
Kimoto, K. et al. Relationship of bacterial
strains to clinical syndromes of Campylobacterassociated neuropathies. Neurology 67,
1837–1843 (2006).
Mizoguchi, K. et al. Two species of
antiganglioside antibodies in a patient with
a pharyngeal–cervical–brachial variant of
Guillain–Barré syndrome. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 57, 1121–1123 (1994).
Miura, Y., Susuki, K., Yuki, N., Ayabe, M. &
Shoji, H. Guillain–Barré syndrome presenting
pharyngeal–cervical–brachial weakness in the
recovery phase. Eur. Neurol. 48, 53–54 (2002).
Koike, H. et al. Clinicopathological features of
acute autonomic and sensory neuropathy.
Brain 133, 2881–2896 (2010).
Koike, H. et al. The spectrum of
clinicopathological features in pure autonomic
neuropathy. J. Neurol. 259, 2067–2075 (2012).
Ohyama, K. et al. Autonomic manifestations in
acute sensory ataxic neuropathy: a case
report. Auton. Neurosci. 179, 155–158 (2013).

20. Uncini, A. & Yuki, N. Sensory Guillain–Barré
syndrome and related disorders: an attempt at
systematization. Muscle Nerve 45, 464–470
(2012).
21. Pan, C. L., Yuki, N., Koga, M., Chiang, M. C. &
Hsieh, S. T. Acute sensory ataxic neuropathy
associated with monospecific anti-GD1b IgG
antibody. Neurology 57, 1316–1318 (2001).
22. Yuki, N., Odaka, M. & Hirata, K. Acute
ophthalmoparesis (without ataxia) associated
with anti-GQ1b IgG antibody: clinical features.
Ophthalmology 108, 196–200 (2001).
23. Kokubun, N. et al. Conduction block in acute
motor axonal neuropathy. Brain 133,
2897–2908 (2010).
24. Arai, M., Susuki, K. & Koga, M. Axonal
pharyngeal–cervical–brachial variant of
Guillain–Barré syndrome without anti-GT1a
IgG antibody. Muscle Nerve 28, 246–250
(2003).
25. Nagashima, T. et al. Paraparetic Guillain–Barré
syndrome: extending the axonal spectrum.
Neurol. Clin. Neurosci. 1, 224–226 (2013).
26. Umapathi, T., Tan, E. Y., Kokubun, N., Verma, K.
& Yuki, N. Non-demyelinating, reversible
conduction failure in Fisher syndrome and
related disorders. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 83, 941–948 (2012).
27. Susuki, K., Koga, M., Hirata, K., Isogai, E. &
Yuki, N. A Guillain–Barré syndrome variant
with prominent facial diplegia. J. Neurol. 256,
1899–1905 (2009).
28. Uncini, A., Susuki, K. & Yuki, N. Nodoparanodopathy: beyond the demyelinating
and axonal classification in anti-ganglioside
antibody-mediated neuropathies. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 124, 1928–1934 (2013).
29. Shahrizaila, N. & Yuki, N. Bickerstaff brainstem
encephalitis and Fisher syndrome: anti-GQ1b
antibody syndrome. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 84, 576–583 (2013).
30. Ito, M. et al. Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis and Fisher syndrome form a
continuous spectrum: clinical analysis of
581 cases. J. Neurol. 255, 674–682 (2008).
31. Chiba, A., Kusunoki, S., Obata, H.,
Machinami, R. & Kanazawa, I. Serum antiGQ1b IgG antibody is associated with
ophthalmoplegia in Miller Fisher syndrome
and Guillain–Barré syndrome: clinical and
immunohistochemical studies. Neurology 43,
1911–1917 (1993).
32. Liu, J. X., Willison, H. J. & Pedrosa-Domellof, F.
Immunolocalization of GQ1b and related
gangliosides in human extraocular
neuromuscular junctions and muscle spindles.
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 50, 3226–3232
(2009).
33. Ito, M., Matsuno, K., Sakumoto, Y., Hirata, K.
& Yuki, N. Ataxic Guillain–Barré syndrome
and acute sensory ataxic neuropathy form a
continuous spectrum. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 82, 294–299 (2011).
34. Jindal, G., Parmar, V. R. & Gupta, V. K. Isolated
ptosis as acute ophthalmoplegia without ataxia,
positive for anti-GQ1b immunoglobulin G.
Pediatr. Neurol. 41, 451–452 (2009).
35. Yuki, N., Koga, M. & Hirata, K. Isolated internal
ophthalmoplegia associated with
immunoglobulin G anti-GQ1b antibody.
Neurology 51, 1515–1516 (1998).
36. Yuki, N., Susuki, K. & Hirata, K. Ataxic Guillain–
Barré syndrome with anti-GQ1b antibody:
relation to Miller Fisher syndrome. Neurology
54, 1851–1853 (2000).
37. Yuki, N. & Uncini, A. Acute and chronic ataxic
neuropathies with disialosyl antibodies:
a continuous clinical spectrum and a common

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROLOGY

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

pathophysiological mechanism. Muscle Nerve
49, 629–635 (2014).
Notturno, F., Caporale, C. M. & Uncini, A. Acute
sensory ataxic neuropathy with antibodies to
GD1b and GQ1b gangliosides and prompt
recovery. Muscle Nerve 37, 265–268 (2008).
Willison, H. J., Almemar, A., Veitch, J. &
Thrush, D. Acute ataxic neuropathy with crossreactive antibodies to GD1b and GD3
gangliosides. Neurology 44, 2395–2397
(1994).
Koga, M., Yoshino, H., Morimatsu, M. & Yuki, N.
Anti-GT1a IgG in Guillain–Barré syndrome.
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 72, 767–771
(2002).
Nagashima, T., Koga, M., Odaka, M., Hirata, K.
& Yuki, N. Continuous spectrum of pharyngeal–
cervical–brachial variant of Guillain–Barré
syndrome. Arch. Neurol. 64, 1519–1523
(2007).
O’Leary, C. P. et al. Acute oropharyngeal palsy is
associated with antibodies to GQ1b and GT1a
gangliosides. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
61, 649–651 (1996).
Ogawara, K. et al. Axonal Guillain–Barré
syndrome: relation to anti-ganglioside
antibodies and Campylobacter jejuni infection
in Japan. Ann. Neurol. 48, 624–631 (2000).
McKhann, G. M. et al. Acute motor axonal
neuropathy: a frequent cause of acute flaccid
paralysis in China. Ann. Neurol. 33, 333–342
(1993).
Yuki, N. et al. Guillain–Barré syndrome
associated with normal or exaggerated
tendon reflexes. J. Neurol. 259, 1181–1190
(2012).
Jackson, C. E., Barohn, R. J. & Mendell, J. R.
Acute paralytic syndrome in three American
men: comparison with Chinese cases. Arch.
Neurol. 50, 732–735 (1993).
Yuki, N. & Hirata, K. Preserved tendon reflexes
in Campylobacter neuropathy. Ann. Neurol. 43,
546–547 (1998).
Kuwabara, S. et al. Hyperreflexia in axonal
Guillain–Barré syndrome subsequent to
Campylobacter jejuni enteritis. J. Neurol. Sci.
199, 89–92 (2002).
Fokke, C. et al. Diagnosis of Guillain–Barré
syndrome and validation of Brighton criteria.
Brain 137, 33–43 (2014).
Baheti, N. N., Manuel, D., Shinde, P. D.,
Radhakrishnan, A. & Nair, M. Hyperreflexic
Guillain–Barré syndrome. Ann. Indian Acad.
Neurol. 13, 305–307 (2010).
Nishimoto, Y., Odaka, M., Hirata, K. & Yuki, N.
Usefulness of anti-GQ1b IgG antibody testing in
Fisher syndrome compared with cerebrospinal
fluid examination. J. Neuroimmunol. 148,
200–205 (2004).
Uncini, A., Manzoli, C., Notturno, F. &
Capasso, M. Pitfalls in electrodiagnosis of
Guillain–Barré syndrome subtypes. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 81, 1157–1163
(2010).
An ad hoc subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology AIDS Task Force.
Research criteria for diagnosis of chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
(CIDP). Neurology 41, 617–618 (1991).
Joint Task Force of the EFNS and the PNS.
European Federation of Neurological Societies/
Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on
management of chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: report of
a joint task force of the European Federation
of Neurological Societies and the Peripheral
Nerve Society—first revision. J. Peripher. Nerv.
Syst. 15, 1–9 (2010).

VOLUME 10 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | 543
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
55. Rajabally, Y. A., Nicolas, G., Pieret, F., Bouche, P.
& Van den Bergh, P. Y. Validity of diagnostic
criteria for chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy: a multicentre European study.
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 80, 1364–1368
(2009).
56. Ichikawa, H. et al. Unilateral oculomotor nerve
palsy associated with anti-GQ1b IgG antibody.
Neurology 59, 957–958 (2002).
57. Logullo, F., Manicone, M., Di Bella, P. &
Provinciali, L. Asymmetric Guillain–Barré
syndrome. Neurol. Sci. 27, 355–359 (2006).
58. Susuki, K., Yuki, N., Muramatsu, M. & Hirata, K.
Unilateral ophthalmoparesis and limb ataxia
associated with anti-GQ1b IgG antibody.
J. Neurol. 247, 652–653 (2000).
59. Ruts, L., van Koningsveld, R. & van Doorn, P. A.
Distinguishing acute-onset CIDP from Guillain–
Barré syndrome with treatment related
fluctuations. Neurology 65, 138–140 (2005).
60. Kuitwaard, K., van Koningsveld, R., Ruts, L.,
Jacobs, B. C. & van Doorn, P. A. Recurrent
Guillain–Barré syndrome. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 80, 56–59 (2009).
61. Mossberg, N. et al. The recurrent Guillain–Barré
syndrome: a long-term population-based study.
Acta Neurol. Scand. 126, 154–161 (2012).

544 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 10

62. Ropper, A. H. The Guillain–Barré syndrome.
N. Engl. J. Med. 326, 1130–1136 (1992).
63. Nagashima, T., Odaka, M., Koga, M., Yuki, N.
& Hirata, K. A case of pharyngeal–cervical–
brachial weakness suggestive of the
nosological continuity between acute
oropharyngeal palsy [Japanese]. Rinsho
Shinkeigaku 42, 523–526 (2002).
64. Bickerstaff, E. R. & Cloake, P. C.
Mesencephalitis and rhombencephalitis.
Br. Med. J. 2, 77–81 (1951).
65. Odaka, M. et al. Bickerstaff’s brainstem
encephalitis: clinical features of 62 cases
and a subgroup associated with Guillain–
Barré syndrome. Brain 126, 2279–2290
(2003).
66. Wakerley, B. R., Soon, D., Chan, Y. C. & Yuki, N.
Atypical Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis:
ataxic hypersomnolence without
ophthalmoplegia. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 84, 1206–1207 (2013).
67. Lin, J. J. et al. Clinical variants of Guillain–Barré
syndrome in children. Pediatr. Neurol. 47,
91–96 (2012).
68. Ropper, A. H. & Samuels, M. A. Adam’s
and Victor’s Principle of Neurology 9th edn
1251–1325 (McGraw–Hill, 2009).



69. Sakakibara, R. et al. Prevalence and
mechanism of bladder dysfunction in Guillain–
Barré syndrome. Neurourol. Urodyn. 28,
432–437 (2009).
70. Yanagihara, N., Mori, H., Kozawa, T.,
Nakamura, K. & Kita, M. Bell’s palsy.
Nonrecurrent v recurrent and unilateral v
bilateral. Arch. Otolaryngol. 110, 374–377
(1984).
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to James Sejvar for his
suggestions and critical reading of the manuscript.
The authors’ work was supported by the Singapore
National Medical Research Council (Individual
Research Grant 10nov086 and Clinician Science
Award 047/2012 to N.Y.) and Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, Singapore (R‑172‑000‑264‑733).
Author contributions
B.R.W. and N.Y. researched data for the article and
contributed equally to writing the article. B.R.W.,
A.U., N.Y. and all members of the GBS Classification
Group made substantial contributions to
discussions of the content, and review and/or
editing of the manuscript before submission.

www.nature.com/nrneurol
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES
CORRIGENDUM
Guillain–Barré and Miller Fisher syndromes—new diagnostic classification
Benjamin R. Wakerley, Antonino Uncini, Nobuhiro Yuki and the GBS Classification Group
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10 (2014); 537–544; doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2014.138
In Box 1 of the originally published article, Jong Seok Bae should have been included as a member of the GBS
Classification Group. Also, in Table 2, the row title ‘Bifacial weakness with distal paraesthesias’ should have
read ‘Bifacial weakness with paraesthesias’. These errors have been corrected in the HTML and PDF versions
of the article.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROLOGY

VOLUME 10 | SEPTEMBER 2014 | i
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

